---
title: "Apprenticeship patterns (O'Reilly)"
date: 2010-09-23T08:17:45+02:00
tags: software development,apprenticeship patterns,Free Software,book,learning,Hacking,
---

# Apprenticeship patterns (O'Reilly)


A few days ago I finished reading the book "Apprenticeship Patterns" - Guidance for the Aspiring Software Craftsman, 
by<br>Dave Hoover, Adewale Oshineye. The book is addressed to readers who have the goal of becoming great software 
devleopers.<br><br>One naive question one could ask is why there is a need for such a book at all? Students are trained 
in computer science at university, then enter some IT departement and simply learn from their peers. So how is software 
development any different than other professions? Turns out there are a few problems with that approach: At university 
students usually don't get the slightest idea of what professional software development looks like. After four years of 
study they still have a long way to go before writing great software. When entering your average IT shop these juniors 
usually are put on some sort of customer project with tight deadlines. However learning implies making mistakes, it 
implies having time to try different routes to find the best one. Lucky are those very few who join a team that has a 
way for integrating and training junior developers. Last but not least at least in Germany tech carrier paths are still 
rare: As soon as developers excel they are offered a promotion - which usually leads straight into management before 
they even had a chance to become masters in their profession.<br><br>So what can people do who love writing software 
and want to become masters in their profession? The book provides various patterns, grouped by task: 
<br><ul><br><li>Emptying the cup deals with setting up an attitude that enables learning: To be able to learn new 
skills the trainee first has to face his ignorance and realise that what he knows already is just a tiny little 
fraction of what differenciates the master from the junior.<br><li>In the second chapter "Walking the long road" the 
book deals with the problem of deciding whether to stick with software development or to go into management. Both paths 
provide their own hurdles and rewards - in the end the developer himself has to decide which one to go. Deciding for a 
technical carrier however might involve identifying new kinds of rewards: Instead of being promoted to senior super 
duper manager, this may involve benefits like getting a 20% project, setting up a company internal user group, getting 
support for presenting ones projects at conferences. The chapter also deals with motivational side of software 
development: Let's face it, professional development usually is way different from what we'd do if we had unlimited 
time. It may involve deadlines that cannot be met, it may invovle customers that are hard to communicate with. One 
might even have to deal with unmovtivated colleagues who have lower quality standards and no intention to learn more 
than what is needed to accomplish the task at hand. So there is the problem of staying  motivated even if times get 
rough. Getting in touch with other developers - external and internal - here can be a great help: Attending user groups 
(or organising one), being part of an open source project, meeting regularly with other developers in one's general 
geografical area all may help to remember the fun things about developing software.<br><li>The third group of patterns 
has been put under the headline "Accurate self-assessment" - as people get better and better it get ever harder to 
remember that there are techniques out there one does not yet know. Being the best in a team means that there is not 
more room to learn in that environment. It's time to find another group to get in touch with others again: To be the 
worst in a team means there is a lot of room for learning, finding mentors helps with getting more information on which 
areas to explore next. Especially helpful is working on a common project with others - doing pair programming can help 
even with picking up just minor optimisations in their work environment.<br><li>The fourth chapter "Perpetual learning" 
deals with finding opportunities to learn new technologies - either in a toy project that in contrast to professional 
work is allowed to break and can be used to try and test new techniques and learn new languages. Other sources for 
learning are the source code itself, tech publications on magazines, books (both new and classic), blogs and mailing 
lists. Reflecting on what you learned helps remember it later - on option to reflect may involve writing up little 
summaries of what you read and keeping them in a place where you can easily retrieve them (for me this blog has turned 
into such a resource - yeah, I guess writing this book summary is part of the exercise, even was a proposal in the book 
itself). Last but not least one of the best resources for reflection and continued learning is to share knowledge - 
though you may feel there are others out there way better then you are, you are the one who just went though all the 
initial loops that no master remembers anymore. You can explain concepts in easy to understand words. Sharing and 
teaching means quickly finding gaps in your own knowledge and fixing them as you go forward. Last but not least it is 
important to create feedback loops: It does not help to learn after three years of coding that what you did does not 
match a customers expectations. As an apprentice you need faster feedback: On a technical level this may involve 
automated tests, code analysis and continuous integration. On a personal level it involves finding people to review 
your code. It means discussing your ideas with peers.<br><li>The last chapter on "Constructing your curriculum" finally 
dealt with the task of finding a way to remain up to date, e.g. by following re-known developers' blogs. But also 
studying the classic literature - there are various books in computer science and software development that have been 
written back in the 60s and 70s but are still highly relevant.<br></ul><br><br>The book does not give you a recipe to 
turn from junior to master in the shortest possible time. However it successfully identifies situations many a software 
developer has encountered in his professional life that made him quesion his current path. It provides ideas on what to 
do to improve one's skills even if the current IT industry may not be best equipped with tools for training 
people.<br><br>My conclusion from the book was that most important is getting in touch with other developers, 
exchanging ideas and working on common projects. Open source get several mentions in the book, but also for me has 
turned out to be a great source for getting feedback, help and input from the best developers I've met so 
far.<br><br>In addition meeting people who are working on similar projects face-to-face provides a lot of important 
feedback as well as new ideas to try out. Talking with someone over a cup of coffee for two hours sometimes can be more 
productive than discussing for days over e-mail. Hacking on a common project, maybe even in the same location, usually 
is the most productive way not only to solve problems but also to pick up new skills.<br>
