---
title: "Berlin Scrumtisch - open discussion"
date: 2010-08-25T21:29:05+02:00
tags: [Self organising teams,Scrum,Definition of done,Team Motivation,Software Foundation,Decision making,]
---

# Berlin Scrumtisch - open discussion


This evening the <a href="http://scrumtisch.net">Berlin Scrumtisch</a> took place in Friedrichshain. More than thirty 
participants followed <a href="https://www.xing.com/profile/Marion_Eickmann">Marion's</a> invitation for discussions on 
Scrum, wine and pizza at <a href="http://www.qype.co.uk/place/748661-La-Vecchia-Trattoria-Berlin">Vecchia 
Trattoria</a>.<br><br>As there were several new participants, Felix started out with a very brief summary of the very 
core concepts of Scrum itself: Most important to know is the basic assumption of Scrum, that is planning ahead of time 
in a very detailed way is impossible. Defining goals and letting those who do the acutal work take the decisions on how 
to reach that goal is way easier and more promising. The whole process relies on fast feedback loops enabling 
developers and business people to run experiments on how to improve their work in a controlled 
environment.<br><br>Scrum comes with three roles: The development team responsible for delivering quality software, the 
product owner responsible for defining development goals that maximise return on investment and the scrum master as the 
moderator and facilitator who takes care that the roles and rituals are not broken.<br><br>Scrum comes with three plus 
one rituals: The daily standup (about 15min) used by the development team to get everyone up to date on a daily basis 
on everyone's status, the Scrum Review and the Scrum Planning. In addition very important each sprint includes a 
retrospective that serves the purpose of improving the scrum team's processes.<br><br>Scrum comes with three artifacts: 
The sorted product backlog of all user stories, the sprint backlog and the burndown chart showing the team's 
progress.<br><br>However Scrum is just a framework - it tells you more on the goals, but less on exactly how to reach 
them. It should serve as a basis to adapt one's processes to the project's needs.<br><br><table><tr><td><img 
src="http://isabel-drost.de/Bilder/wordpress/scrum_08_10_1.jpg"/></td><td><img 
src="http://isabel-drost.de/Bilder/wordpress/scrum_08_10_2.jpg"/></td></tr></table><br><br>In the usual meetup planning 
phase we collected potential topics for discussions and ranked them by voting on them in the end. The topics proposed 
were:<br><ul><br><li>Applications of Scrum for non-software-development projects.<br><li>How to convince teams of 
Scrum?<br><li>Awareness of the definition of done.<br><li>How to integrate testers in a team, extended by discussing 
the values of cross-functional teams.<br><li>How to be a tech PO.<br><li>Adding agile/XP to Scrum.<br><li>How to keep 
the team on focus.<br><li>Decision making in self organising teams.<br><li>Bonus HR in Scrum.<br></ul><br><br>The 
topics rated highest were on raising the awareness for the definition of done and on decision making in self organising 
teams.<br><br><h2>Definition of done</h2><br><br>To introduce the topic, Felix repeated the goal of Scrum teams to 
deliver potentially quality - ahem - shipable software. ;) The problem of the guest and his co-workers was described as 
follows: Teams have definitions that are inconsistant not only across teams but also within teams.<br><br>Ultimately 
the goal of the definition of done is to enable teams to produce shipable software. One option to make the team aware 
of the need for better quality software might be to make them feel the pain their releases cause. It does not help to 
dictate a company-wide definition of done: It's up to the team to define it. However to learn more on what shipable 
means the team must be allowed to make mistakes. They will fail - but learn from that failure as soon as they feel and 
see what gets influenced by their mistakes. As a resulst, they will refine their definition of done.<br><br>As the 
person to make happy in Scrum iterations is the PO, this could mean that the PO simply does not accept features, after 
all he is the one to define what shipable means. One factor that is a pre-condition for teams to be able to learn is to 
keep them stable. Learning needs time - teams need to be allowed to evolve. If yesterday's team does not feel the pain 
their mistakes caused just because the team does not exist anymore or has been reconfigured - how would people be able 
to learn at all?<br><br><h2>Decision making in self organising teams</h2><br>The person proposing this question has the 
problem that in his teams some developers turn into leaders dictating the way software gets implemented. Other team 
members rarely join into that discussion and close to never take decisions. The result are endless discussions w/o real 
results.<br><br>The first idea that came up was for the Scrum Master to act as moderator. Marion came up with the 
proposal to use well known mediation techniques. She promised to share the links - would be great to have them 
published on the <a href="http://scrumtisch.net">Scrumtisch Berlin</a> blog as well. <a 
href="http://thilo-fromm.de">Thilo</a> mentioned there are courses on mediation and moderation that can help him play 
that role. <br><br>As for long discussions: Felix mentioned a few typical patterns (or anti-patterns) that tend to lead 
to developers discussing endlessly:<br><ul><br><li>Fear: fear of punishment for taking the wrong decision usually leads 
developers to avoid decisions altogether. Fix for that would be establishing and open culture that allows for failure 
and that enables people to learn from failure.<br><li>Striving for the 100% solution: Developers are not used to 
incremental thinking and try to solve all problems at once. Fix would be to teach them they get time for refactoring 
and are thus not punished for adhering to the YAGNI principle.<br><li>Personal conflicts in teams can lead to the 
described situation as well and can only be fixed by double-checking the team configuration, potentially changing 
it.<br></ul><br><br>There is a very good book by Cohen on "Succeeding with agile" that has a whole chapter on what 
makes a good Scrum Master. Checking these properties against your chosen Scrum master might help as well.<br><br> 
<br>When discussing this topic we soon discovered one problem with the team configuration as-is: Scrum masters used to 
be system architects or senior software developers - that is, highly respected, influencial people. Maybe simply 
re-configuring teams might help already.  <br><br>Thanks to Marion for organising the evening - and thanks to all 
attendees for your questions and input on discussion topics. Looking forward to the next edition of the 
Scrumtisch.<br><br>Disclaimer: I usually just take notes on an old-fashioned paper-notebook, typing stuff into the blog 
after the meeting is over. Only reason I do it the same evening is the goal of keeping the list of draft postings as 
short as possible.
