---
title: "CfP: Data Analysis Dev Room at Fosdem 2011"
date: 2010-10-27T06:56:56+02:00
tags: Lucene,data analysis,Hadoop,General,Mahout,Fosdem,cfp,
---

# CfP: Data Analysis Dev Room at Fosdem 2011


<center>Call for Presentations: Data Analysis Dev Room, FOSDEM<br>http://fosdem.org<br>5 February 2011<br>1pm to 
7pm<br>Brussels, Belgium<br></center><br><br>This is to announce the Data Analysis DevRoom co-located with FOSDEM. The 
first Meetup on analysing and learning from data, taking place in Brussels, Belgium.<br><br>Important Dates (all dates 
in GMT +2):<br><ul><br><li>Submission deadline:  2010-12-17<br><li>Notification of accepted speakers: 
2010-12-20<br><li>Publication of final schedule:  2011-01-10<br><li>Meetup: 2011-02-05<br></ul><br><br>Data analysis is 
an increasingly popular topic in the hacker community. This trend is illustrated by declarations such 
as:<br><br><blockquote><br>"I keep saying the sexy job in the next ten years will be statisticians. People think I’m 
joking, but who would’ve guessed that computer engineers would’ve been the sexy job of the 1990s? The ability to take 
data—to be able to understand it, to process it, to extract value from it, to visualize it, to communicate it—that’s 
going to be a hugely important skill in the next decades, not only at the professional level but even at the 
educational level for elementary school kids, for high school kids, for college kids. Because now we really do have 
essentially free and ubiquitous data. So the complimentary scarce factor is the ability to understand that data and 
extract value from it."<br><br>-- Hal Varian, Google’s chief economist<br></blockquote><br><br><br><b>Topics</b><br>The 
event will comprise presentations on scalable data processing. We invite you to submit talks on the 
topics:<br><br><ul><br><li>Information retrieval / Search<br><li>Large Scale data processing<br><li>Machine 
Learning<br><li>Text Mining<br><li>Computer vision<br><li>Linked Open Data<br><li>Sample list of related open source / 
data projects (not exhaustive) :<br><li>http://lucene.apache.org<br><li>http://hadoop.apache.org (including MapReduce, 
Pig, Hive, 
...)<br><li>http://www.r-project.org/<br><li>http://scipy.org<br><li>http://mahout.apache.org<br><li>http://opennlp.sour
ceforge.net<br><li>http://nltk.org<br><li>http://opencv.willowgarage.com<br><li>http://mloss.org & 
http://mldata.org<br><li>http://dbpedia.org & http://freebase.com<br></ul><br><br>Closely related topics not explicitly 
listed above are welcome.<br><br>High quality, technical submissions are called for, ranging from principles to 
practice.<br><br>We are looking for presentations on the implementation of the systems themselves, real world 
applications and case studies.<br><br>Submissions should be based on free software 
solutions.<br><br><b>Submission</b><br>Proposals should be submitted at fosdem.datadevroom@gmail.com no later than 
2010-12-17. Acceptance notifications will be sent out on 2010-12-20.<br><br>Please include your name, bio and email, 
the title of the talk, a brief abstract in English language. Please indicate the level of experience with the topic 
your audience should have (e.g. whether your talk will be suitable for newbies or is targeted for experienced 
users.)<br><br>The presentation format is short: 30 minutes including questions. We will be enforcing the schedule 
rigorously.<br><br><b>Sponsoring</b><br>If you are interested in sponsoring the event (e.g. we would be happy to 
provide videos after the event, free drinks for attendees as well as an after-show party), please contact us. Note: 
"DataDevRoom sponsors" will not be endorsed as "FOSDEM sponsors" and hence not listed in the sponsors section on the 
fosdem.org website.<br><br><b>Announcements</b><br>Follow @DataDevRoom on twitter for updates. News on the conference 
will be published on our website at http://fosdem.org.<br><br><b>Program Chairs:</b><br><ul><br><li>Olivier Grisel - 
@ogrisel<br><li>Isabel Drost - @MaineC<br><li>Nicolas Maillot - @nmaillot<br></ul><br>Please re-distribute this CFP to 
people who might be interested.
