---
title: "CFP - Berlin Buzzwords 2011 - search, score, scale"
date: 2011-01-26T08:00:20+01:00
tags: Lucene,Hadoop,Mahout,Berlin,hbase,Berlin Buzzwords,
---

# CFP - Berlin Buzzwords 2011 - search, score, scale


    This is to announce the Berlin Buzzwords 2011. The second edition of the successful conference on scalable and open 
search, data processing and data storage in Germany,<br>taking place in Berlin.<br><br><br><br><center>   <br>Call for 
Presentations Berlin Buzzwords<br><br>http://berlinbuzzwords.de<br><br>Berlin Buzzwords 2011 - Search, Store, 
Scale<br><br>6/7 June 2011<br></center><br><br><br><br>The event will comprise presentations on scalable data 
processing. We invite you to submit talks on the topics:<br><br><br><br><ul><br><li>IR / Search - Lucene, Solr, katta 
or comparable solutions<br><li>NoSQL - like CouchDB, MongoDB, Jackrabbit, HBase and others<br><li>Hadoop - Hadoop 
itself, MapReduce, Cascading or Pig and relatives<br></ul><br><br><br><br>Closely related topics not explicitly listed 
above are welcome. We are looking for presentations on the implementation of the systems themselves, real world 
applications and case studies. <br><br><br><br> Important Dates (all dates in GMT +2) <br><ul><br><li>Submission 
deadline: March 1st 2011, 23:59 MEZ<br><li>Notification of accepted speakers: March 22th, 2011, MEZ. 
<br><li>Publication of final schedule: April 5th, 2011. <br><li>Conference: June 6/7. 2011<br></ul><br><br><br><br>High 
quality, technical submissions are called for, ranging from principles to practice. We are looking for real world use 
cases, background on the architecture of specific projects and a deep dive into architectures built on top of e.g. 
Hadoop clusters. <br><br><br><br>Proposals should be submitted at <a 
href="http://berlinbuzzwords.de/content/cfp-0">http://berlinbuzzwords.de/content/cfp-0</a> no later than March 1st, 
2011. Acceptance notifications will be sent out soon after the submission deadline. Please include your name, bio and 
email, the title of the talk, a brief abstract in English language.  Please indicate whether you want to give a 
lightning (10min), short (20min) or long (40min)  presentation and indicate the level of experience with the topic your 
audience should have (e.g. whether your talk will be suitable for newbies or is targeted for experienced users.) If 
you'd like to pitch your brand new product in your talk, please let us know as well - there will be extra space for 
presenting new ideas, awesome products and great new projects.<br><br><br><br>The presentation format is short. We will 
be enforcing the schedule rigorously. <br><br><br><br>If you are interested in sponsoring the event (e.g. we would be 
happy to provide videos after the event, free drinks for attendees as well as an after-show party), please contact us. 
<br><br><br><br>Follow @berlinbuzzwords on Twitter for updates. News on the conference will be published on our website 
at <a href="http://berlinbuzzwords.de">http://berlinbuzzwords.de</a>.<br><br><br><br>Program Chairs: Isabel Drost, Jan 
Lehnardt, and Simon Willnauer.<br><br><br><br>Schedule and further updates on the event will be published on 
http://berlinbuzzwords.de Please re-distribute this CfP to people who might be interested.<br><br><br><br>Contact us 
at:<br><br><br><br>newthinking communications GmbH<br>Schönhauser Allee 6/7<br>10119 Berlin, Germany<br>Julia Gemählich 
<jge@newthinking.de><br>Isabel Drost <isabel@apache.org><br>+49(0)30-9210 596
