---
title: "Christmas Scrumtisch"
date: 2010-11-29T22:59:28+01:00
tags: [Scrum,Self organising teams,Software Foundation,Team Motivation,team,]
---

# Christmas Scrumtisch


Today the last <a href="http://scrumtisch.net">Scrumtisch Berlin</a> in 2010 took place in Friedrichshain. Thanks to <a 
href="https://www.xing.com/profile/Marion_Eickmann">Marion Eickmann</a> and <a 
href="http://de.linkedin.com/in/andreat">Andrea Tomasini</a> for organising the Scrum user group regularly for the past 
years.<br><br>Though no presentation had been scheduled ahead of time the Scrumtisch was well attended by over twenty 
people, mostly from companies based in Berlin who are either using Scrum already or are currently in a transition 
phase.<br><br>We went straight into collecting and voting on topics for discussion. In total we ended up having eight 
potential topics listed, including but not limited to<br><br><ul><br><li>Scrum and non-feature teams, does it work - 
and if, how?<br><li>Transitioning to Scrum - what are the stake holders that must be convinced first in a 
company?<br><li>Scrum with teams made of people buying into Scrum and those that don't - does that work?<br><li>Can 
Scrum be combined with people who want to telecommute?<br><li>Scrum and platform development - how does that get 
combined?<br><li>Scrum in systems engineering, embedded development - how to setup teams?<br></ul><br><br>After voting 
we had the two clear winners discussing Scrum in teams that don't buy into the method completely as well as 
telecommuting with Scrum teams.<br><br><h2>Scrum with broken teams</h2><br>The situation described: The attendee 
proposing the topic has the problem of being Scrum master at  a team that does not completely buy into Scrum. There are 
a few developers who like being self-organising, who love short feedback cycles. However there are a few others who 
would rather stick with their technological niche, get tasks assigned to them and avoid taking over tasks from 
others.<br><br>During discussion we found out that in this company Scrum had been introduced as a grass-roots movement 
little over a year ago. The introduction of the method led to success clearly visible in the company. In turn the 
method was tried on a larger team as well. However at the moment the team is at a point where it is about to break 
apart: Into developers happy with change, flexible enough to adapt to shift in technology and a second half that would 
rather continue developing the old way.<br><br>One very important point was raised by one of the attendees: With Scrum 
getting introduced so fast, compared to the length in time the company had been living before, it may well be time to 
slow down a bit. To sit down with the team in a relaxed environment and find out more on how everyone is assessing the 
current situation. Find out more on what people like about the new approach, and about what should be changed and still 
needs improvement. In the end it's not a process issue but a people problem - there is a need to get the team 
on-board.<br><br>Team-building activities might help as well - let the team experience what it means to be able to rely 
on each other. What does it mean to learn new things in short time, to co-operate to solve tasks so far 
untackled?<br><br>If team-members start ignoring the sprint backlog working on other tasks instead there is a question 
about whether there is enough trust in the product-owner's decisions. On the other hand with pressure resting on the 
team's shoulders there might be a need to stop the train, fix all open issues and continue only after the project is 
back in shape. However also this needs all team members working towards a common goal - with everyone willing to take 
up any open task.<br><br><h2>Scrum and telecommuting</h2><br>Basically the question was whether it works at all (clear 
yes from the audience) and if, which best practices to use. To be more precise: Does Scrum still work if some of the 
team members work from home a few days a week but are in the office all other time. The risk of course lies in loosing 
information, in the team building common knowledge. And thus becoming less productive.<br><br>There are technical tools 
that can help the process: electronic scrum boards (such as Greenhopper for JIRA or Agilo) as well as tele-conferencing 
systems, wikis, social networking tools, screen sharing for easier pair programming. All tools used must entail less 
overhead then the provide in benefit to the team however. Communication will become more costly - however if and to 
what extend this translates to a loss in productivity varies greatly.<br><br>There must be a clear commitment from both 
sides - the telecommuter as well as the team on-site - to keep the remote person in the loop. Actually it is easier 
with teams that are completely remote. This experience is sort of familiar from any open source project: With people 
working in different time zones it comes naturally to take any decision on a mailing list. However with some people 
having the chance to communicate face-to-face suddenly decisions become way less transparent. At Apache we even go as 
far as telling people that any decision that is not taken on the mailing list, never really was taken at all. A good 
insight into how distributed teams at Apache work has been given earlier by <a 
href="http://grep.codeconsult.ch/2009/11/17/what-makes-apache-tick/">Bertrand</a> <a 
href="http://grep.codeconsult.ch/2010/07/16/this-is-how-we-work-at-apache"/>Delacr√©taz</a>.<br><br>For team building 
reasons it may make sense to start out with a co-located team and split off people interested in working from home 
later on. That way people have a chance to get to know each other face-to-face which makes later digital-only 
communication way easier.<br><br>Thanks again to Marion and Andrea for organising today's <a 
href="http://scrumtisch.net">Scrumtisch</a>. If you are using Scrum and happen to be in Berlin - send an e-mail to 
Marion to let her know you are interested in the event, or simply join us at the published date.
