---
title: "Design Thinking @ Scrumtisch Berlin"
date: 2011-09-26T21:38:14+02:00
tags: [agile,Scrum,lean,scrumtisch,]
---

# Design Thinking @ Scrumtisch Berlin


<img src="/mary2011.JPG" style="float:left;margin-right:20px"/>This evening <a 
href="http://www.poppendieck.com/">Mary Poppendieck</a> gave a presentation on Design Thinking in Berlin. "What does 
the US Military have in common with Apple?" In her talk Mary went into more detail about how increasing complexity 
calls for a need to rethink design. <a href="http://dl.dropbox.com/u/727065/DesignThinking4Berlin.pdf">Slides are 
available online</a>. Thanks for sharing them.<br><br>Mary started with a question for the audience on who in your 
company decides what is to be developed: Is it the PO? Is it a "them" or is it "us"? In a world of growing complexities 
and faster innovation cycles, thinking of them doing the design more and more becomes a huge business risk. It's time 
to start thinking of development teams as groups of people solving a business need - forgetting about the "that's none 
of my business" attitude.<br><br>Lets first dig deeper into the three steps of design (according to the book <a 
href="http://www.amazon.de/Design-Essays-Computer-Scientist/dp/0201362988">The design of design</a>) the three steps of 
design are:<br><br><ul><br><li>Understanding the problem: Actually finding out what is the problem, what is to be 
designed is the hardest part. It's best done in a small team as opposed to by a single person.<br><li>Design the 
solution: This step involves uncovering specific requirements and identifying alternative solutions - before actually 
being able to judge whether an alternative is a viable way of solving a given problem, the harder part is identifying 
possible alternative solutions.<br><li>Implementing the design: This step must involve getting users and developers of 
the resulting system work closely together.<br></ul><br><br>To come up with a truly successful design these three steps 
most likely need to be iterated as what we learn in later steps has to influence earlier steps.<br><br><img 
src="/graph_mary_2012.JPG" style="float:right" width="300"/> When it comes to 
design, at traditional corporations there are various job titles for people involved with design. The graph 
distinguishes teams developing products vs. supporting internal processes. It makes a difference between software and 
hardware development. In addition there is a difference between people deciding on what to design (denoted in red) and 
those deciding how to develop (denoted in green). When looking at Scrum all of these roles are combined in the role of 
the product owner. When taking a closer look this seems to be a large over-simplification - especially when taking into 
account that the product owner in general is realized not as a role that has to be provided for but as a job 
description of one single person. It seems like this is too much work and too many hats for one single 
person.<br><br>In contrast Mary advocates a far more hollistic definition of the designers role: In current teams 
design is mostly being done up-front, in a very detailed way with results in the form of small user stories being 
handed over to the team afterwards. In contrast to that developers should be integrated in the design process itself - 
they need to participate, provide their input to come up with really innovative solutions.<br><br><h3>Step one: 
Understanding the problem</h3><br><br>The presentation went into more detail on three different approaches to solving 
the first step in design - that is understanding the problem. The first way was coined as the military approach. In the 
<a href="http://www.fas.org/irp/doddir/army/fm5-0.pdf">The operations process</a> a chapter on design was added to cope 
with complex situations that do not match the expected configuration.<br><br><img 
src="/mil_mary_2011.JPG" style="float:right" width=300/><br><br>In such 
situations a combination of collaboration, dialog, critical thinking and creative thinking seems more important than 
blindly following command. According to the US military's procedures design again is an iterative three step process: 
From framing the problem, to experimenting and building prototypical solutions, to making sense of the situation and 
possibly going back to earlier steps based on what we have learned. One important feature of successful design teams is 
that the are composed of people with diverse backgrounds to not miss details about the situation.<br><br>The second 
approach to design is the Ethnographic approach. Mary showed a video introducing design company IDEO. The interesting 
take away for me was that again teams need to be diverse to see all details, that designers need not only find 
statistics on existing products but also go out to the customer using the product and listen to those "experts". The 
need to work under time constraints, work in a very focused manner, build prototypes - not to deploy them but to learn 
from them, merge them and throw away what does not work early in the process.<br><br>Coming from a data driven, 
Hadoop-y background, the third approach was the one most familiar to me: The data based approach focuses on finding 
success metrics and optimising those. When going back to the "Mythical man month" example of IBM building the IBM PCjr 
- the team spending 2 years developing a product that was a horrible failure, a product that was judged very badly in 
common it magazines: What could they have changed to do better? Well the solution almost is in the question: If there 
are people writing articles to judge products, people that have criteria for judging product success - why not optimise 
for their criteria? Another example would be Toyota developing the Lexus: Early in the process they decided to optimise 
for a top score on each of the car magazine reviews. Turned out though hard it was, it was not impossible. And lead to 
huge success on the sales side.<br><br>So instead of being caught in our little development bubble maybe it's time to 
think bigger - to think not only about what makes our project successful but to think about what makes business 
successful. And while at it - why not measure success or failure of a piece of software by how successful it is 
monetarily? This leads to a whole new way of thinking about development:<br><br><ul><br><li>Instead of a product 
roadmap we start thinking about a business model canvas: What metric gives us information on the business success of a 
new feature? How can we measure that? This can be as easy as click conversion rate. It's closely tied to the way you 
make money.<br><li>Instead of a product vision we turn to measuring a product to market fit.<br><li>Instead of a 
release plan we start thinking about the minimal viable product: What is the least you can do to generate more 
revenue?<br><li>Instead of an on-site customer we start having a on-site developer. This is about getting developers 
out of the building, get them to talk to your users and get this experience back in. Note: To some extend this is even 
possible by looking over the user's shoulder by analysing your log files. Ever thought of taking a closer look at your 
search engines queries that return no results? Maybe instead of cursing the users that are too stupid to use your 
interface it's time to re-think your interface design or add more features to your search engine.<br><li>Instead of 
iterations we have a loop of building - measuring - learning about our product.<br><li>Instead of an iteration backlog 
at the end of each loop we have to decide about whether to preserve the current development direction or pivot it a 
bit.<br><li>Instead of a backlog of things to do we have a list of things to learn about our users.<br><li>Instead of 
detailed tiny user stories we have hypothesis of how our product is used that are validated or falsified by actual 
data.<br><li>Instead of continuous integration you have continuous deployment that is much more 
interesting.<br><li>Instead of acceptance tests we may have split tests, A/B tests or similar.<br><li>Instead of a 
definition of done including only development it suddenly also comprises validating the data - did we actually convert 
more users?<br><li>Instead of costumer feedback we are having a cohort-based metric, we start watching our users to 
learn - they are rarely willing to give explicit feedback, but their actions are very telling.<br><li>Instead of a 
product owner we have entrepreneurs that have the business as a whole in mind.<br></ul><br><br><h3>Design a 
solution</h3><br><br>Good industrial design is made up of ten principles: It's innovative, makes the product useful, 
understandable, aesthetic, unobtrusive, honest (does not fool users), long lasting, thorough through, environmentally 
friendly - and most important of all there is as few design in there as possible.<br><br>As one example Mary mentioned 
the flight booking site <a href="http://www.hipmunk.com/">Hipmunk.com</a> that gives users the chance to sort flights 
by least agony. It optimises for the best flying experience - not the best buying experience.<br><br>In the end it's 
all about building what the user needs - not selling what your build. It's about watching your users and learning about 
their needs.<br><br><h3>Implementing design</h3><br><br>One grave warning: Do not divorce design from development: Ford 
was a driver and racer himself, making him a great car designer. Wright flew the aircrafts he designed. Tom Edison 
thought through the whole process. Also in the tech industry the companies that are nowadays most successful were 
founded by people who are or at least were themselves very actively using the stuff they are building - think Bill 
Gates, Steve Wozniak and Steve Jobs, Sergey Brin and Larry Page. Takeaway is to do the job you are trying to automate, 
to have incremental development and delivery.<br><br>In the end it all boils down to how fast a learner you are: Not 
the most intelligent nor the strongest will survive. It's the one that is fastest to adapt to change that will be 
successful. One commonly used analogy for that is the so-called OODA cycle coming from John Boyd: The tighter your 
cycle of observing, orienting, deciding and acting is, the likelier you are to be successful among your 
competitors.<br><br>Speaking of release cycles Mary gave a very nice graph of various release cycle 
lengths.<br><br><center><img src="/slide2_mary_2011.JPG"/></center><br><br>In 
her experience teams that have deployment cycles of six months and above are likely to spend one third of their time 
hardening their software. If you are down to a quarter it's likely that the bottleneck is your business model. Maybe it 
is weird contracts or business partners expecting support for the exact version you shipped years ago. When you are 
down to a month per release you likely are running a software as a service model. As clarified later after a question 
from the audience for Mary this does include setups where customers basically buy a software including all future 
updates for a set period of time - including an automated roll-out. If you are down to daily or even just weekly 
releases you are likely running the product yourself. Mose likely then everyone is part of the team.<br><br><img 
src="/mary-question.JPG" style="float:left;margin-right:20px" width="150"/>After 
her talk Mary answered various questions from the audience: According to her experience Scrum defines the team way too 
narrow by focusing on development only - with Scrum we are possibly getting perfect at doing the wrong thing very well 
- forgetting all about design and business.<br><br>One very general advise that leads to an interesting conclusion is 
to not waste your life, to not spend years of your life working on projects that are not needed by anyone. In the end 
this leads to realizing that failed projects are also caused by the developers not raising concerns and 
issues.<br><br>Mary is a huge proponent of trusting your team: Do not hand them detailed lists of user stories. You 
have hired great, senior people (or haven't you??) - give them an idea what you want and let them figure out the 
details by talking to the right people.<br><br>When asked for tools to support the lean startup process in a startup 
Mary emphasized the need for communication. Tools are likely to only slow you down: Get people to communicate, to sit 
at one table. Have a weekly or bi-weekly meeting to get everyone in sync. Otherwise let developers figure out their way 
to collaborate.<br><br>The talk was kindly hosted by Immobilien Scout, organised by agiliero with some tickets handed 
over to the Berlin <a href="http://www.scrumtisch.net">Scrumtisch</a>. Thanks guys.
