---
title: "Dorkbot Berlin"
date: 2012-01-30T23:18:46+01:00
tags: [Hacking,c-base,]
---

# Dorkbot Berlin


c-base - 8p.m. on a Monday evening - the room is packed (and pretty cloudy as well): Time for <a 
href="http://www.dorkbot.org/dorkbotbln/">Dorkbot</a>, a short series of talks on "People doing strange things with 
electricity" hosted by Frank Rieger.<br><br>First talk up on stage was Gismo on <a 
href="https://m21.hyte.de/planet/">Raumfahrtagentur</a> - a Berlin maker-space located in Wedding. Originating from the 
presenter's interest in electrical bikes a group of ten people interested in hardware hacking got together. Projects 
include but are not limited to 3D printing, 3D scanning, textile hacking, a collaborative podcast. Essentially the idea 
is to provide room and infrastructure to be used collaboratively by a group of members. From an organisational point of 
view the group is incorporated as a GmbH - however none of the projects is mainly targeted to commercialization: It's 
main target group are hobbyists, researchers and open hardware/software people. If interested: Each Monday evening 
there is a "Sunday of the Kosmonauts" where externals are invited to come visit.<br><br>Second talk was on the project 
<a href="http://meyleankronemann.de/klackerlaken/">Drinkenlights (Klackerlaken)</a> - a way for children to learn the 
basics of electronics without any soldering (hardware available for three Euros max). Experiences made with giving the 
ingredients for creating these toys to children of varying ages were interesting: From kids of about five years playing 
around up to ten/eleven year olds that when in school seemingly had to re-learn being creative without being given much 
direction or instruction on the task at hand.<br><br>In the third talk Martin Kaltenbrunner introduced his <a 
href="http://vimeo.com/35791602">Tworse Key</a> - a nice symbiosis of old technology (a morse key) and new media 
(Twitter). Essentially built on top of an Arduino Ethernet board it made it possible to turn morse messages into 
Tweets. Martin also gave a brief overview of related art projects and briefly touched upon the changes that open source 
and open hardware bring to art: There are projects that open all design and source code to the public to benefit from a 
wider distribution channel (without having to actually produce anything), working on designs in a collaborative way and 
get improvements back to the original project. All of these form a stark contrast to the existing idea of having one 
single author whose contribution is to build a physical object that is then presented in exhibitions - providing both, 
new possibilities and new challenges to artists.<br><br>In the last presentation Milosch introduced his new project <a 
href="http://etib.org/">ETIB</a> whose goal it is to bring hardware hacking geeks together with textile geeks to work 
on integrating circuits into clothes.<br><br>If you are interested in hacking spaces in general and what is happening 
in that direction in Berlin, mark this Friday in your calendar: c-base will be hosting a <a 
href="http://blog.hackerspaces.org/2012/01/13/upcoming-symposium-in-berlin-germany-hackerspaces-the-story-so-far-and-the
-future-ahead/">Hackerspace meetup</a> - so if you want to know how hackerspaces work or want to create one yourself, 
this event might be interesting to you.
