---
title: "E17 - FOSDEM 07"
date: 2013-02-18T20:46:25+01:00
tags: [Fosdem,Event,e17,]
---

# E17 - FOSDEM 07


I'm really glad the NoSQL room was all packed on afternoon – otherwise I'd have missed an amazing talk by people behind 
Enlightenment – a window manager that is older than Gnome, nearly older than KDE and has been my favourite choice for 
years and years (simply because they have sensible default configuration options: focus follows mouse, virtual desktops 
that allow for desktop switching when moving the mouse close to the screen edges, menu opening when clicking anywhere 
on the desktop background, options for remembering window placement and configuration on re-boot etc).<br><br>Finally 
in December last year they actually did realease E17 after more than a decade of work. They now feature a tiling 
module, split desktops per screen, launchers, taskbars, systrays (*brrr*), screenshotting and multiple sharing options, 
custom layout modules for desktop and mobile.<br><br>There's a full fledged file manager that is also used as file 
selector. There is a compositor with wayland client support, that works decently even on old or slow hardware (think 
raspberry pi).<br>Their main goal is not to build a window manager that even your grandma can use. Rather they focus on 
stuff for the geeks that just works, is efficient, has lots of eye candy and when run on a nexus7 instead of unity 
saves 200MB of RAM.<br><br>Their main goal is to be a base for touch and mobile development. The number of desktops is 
shrinking giving way to more and more mobile devices. Fortunately the project is now sponsored (as in paid developers) 
by Samsung as part of their Tizen efforts. E17 does work as part of Tizen for years now, the only part missing is a 
product running the software available for purchase.<br><br>The goals for E18 (to be released end of 2013 – hear, hear) 
include going beyond the desktop, to polish things up, provide more default profiles for diverse devices, optimise 
battery and memory consumption, run without swap space, avoid going to memory instead of the cache to avoid draining 
the battery of mobile devices. There will be image and font sharing across processes, faster software rendering, async 
rendering with more threads. There's even thoughts to deal with different finger size issues on touch 
devices.<br><br>On using the composite manager as default: It made the code and optimisation a whole lot easier, though 
there are still issues with multiple screens that all switch compositing off in case of full screen games that cannot 
run with it turned on.<br><br>There will be work to integrate better with wayland, support for physics and sounds in 
themes, more compositing signals, improved gadget infrastructures, easier content sharing options – and all the cool 
stuff users can think of.
