---
title: "February 2012 Apache Hadoop Get Together Berlin"
date: 2012-01-31T20:34:25+01:00
tags: [Kanban,Scrum,Hadoop,Get Together,Berlin Apache Hadoop,]
---

# February 2012 Apache Hadoop Get Together Berlin


The upcoming Apache Hadoop Get-Together is scheduled for 22. February, 6 p.m. - taking place at Axel Springer, 
Axel-Springer-Str. 65, 10888 Berlin. Thanks to Springer for sponsoring the location!<br><br>Note: It is important to 
indicate attendance. <b>Due to security restrictions at the venue only registered visitors will be permitted</b>. Get 
your ticket here: <a 
href="https://www.xing.com/events/hadoop-22-02-859807">https://www.xing.com/events/hadoop-22-02-859807</a><br><br>Talks 
scheduled thus far:<br><br>Markus Andrezak : "Queue Management in Product Development with Kanban - enabling flow and 
fast feedback along the value chain" - It's a truism today that fast feedback from your market is a key advantage. This 
talk is about how you can deliver smallest product increments or MVPs (minimal viable products) quickly to your market 
to get fastest possible feedback on cause and effect of your product changes. To achieve that, it helps to provide a 
continuous deployment infrastructure as well as all you need for A/B testing and other feedback instruments. To make 
the most of these achievements, Kanban helps to limit work in progress, thus manage queues and speed up lead times 
(time from order to delivery or concept to cash). This helps us speed through the OODA Loop, i.e. Eric Ries' (The Lean 
Startup) Model -> Build -> Code -> Measure -> Data -> Validate -> Model. The more we can go through the loop, the more 
we have a chance to fine tune and validate our model of the business and finally make the right 
decisions.<br><br>Markus is one of Germany’s leading Kanban practitioners - writing and presenting talks about it in 
numerous publications and conferences. He will provide a brief view into how he is achieving fast feedback in diverse 
contexts.<br>Currently he is Head of mobile commerce at mobile.de.<br><br>Martin Scholl : "On Firehoses and Storms: 
Event Thinking, Event Processing" - The SQL doctrine is still in full effect and still fundamentally affects the way 
software is designed, the state it is stored in as well as the system architecture. With the NoSQL movement people have 
started to realize that the manner in which data is stored affects the full stack -- and that reduction of impedance 
mismatch is a good thing(TM). "Thinking in events" follows this tradition of questioning what is state-of-the-art. 
Modeling a system not in mutable entities (as with data stores) but as a stream of immutable events that incrementally 
modify state, yields results that will exceed your expectations. This talk will be about event thinking, event software 
modeling and how Twitter's Storm can help you process events at large.<br><br>Martin Scholl is interested in data 
management systems. He is also a Founder of infinipool GmbH.<br><br><br>Fabian Hüske : "Large-Scale Data Analysis 
Beyond Map/Reduce" - Stratosphere is a joint project by TU Berlin, HU Berlin, and HPI Potsdam and researches 
"Information Management on the Cloud". In the course of the project, a massively parallel data processing system is 
built. The current version of the system consists of the parallel PACT programming model, a database inspired 
optimizer, and the parallel dataflow processing engine, Nephele. Stratosphere has been released as open source. This 
talk will focus on the PACT programming model, which is a generalization of Map/Reduce, and show how PACT eases the 
specification of complex data analysis tasks. At the end of the talk, an overview of Stratosphere's upcoming release 
will be given.<br><br>Fabian has been a research associate at the Database Systems and Information Management (DIMA) 
group at the Technische Universität Berlin since June 2008. He is working in the Stratosphere research project, 
focusing on parallel programming models, parallel data processing, and query optimization. Fabian started his studies 
at the University of Cooperative Education, Stuttgart, in cooperation with IBM Germany in 2003. During that course, he 
visited the IBM Almaden Research Center in San Jose, USA, twice and finished in 2006. Fabian undertook his studies at 
Universität Ulm and earned a master's degree in 2008. His research interests include distributed information 
management, query processing, and query optimization.<br><br><br>A big Thank You goes to Axel Springer for providing 
the venue at no cost for our event and for paying for videos to be taped of the presentations. A huge thanks also to <a 
href="http://www.linkedin.com/profile/view?id=9861942&locale=en_US&trk=tyah">David Obermann</a> for organising the 
event.<br> <br>Looking forward to seeing you in Berlin.
