---
title: "FOSDEM 2010 - part 3"
date: 2010-02-10T21:02:18+01:00
tags: [Freetime,Fosdem,Free Software,Hadoop,General,]
---

# FOSDEM 2010 - part 3


Sunday started in Janson with <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adrian_Bowyer">Andrian Bowyer's</a> talk on <a 
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RepRap_Project">RepRap</a> machines, that is devices that can be used as 
manufacturing devices and are able to replicate themselves. After that I went over to the Mono dev room to listen to <a 
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miguel_de_Icaza">Miguel de Icaza</a> on Mono Edge. A great talk on the history of 
Mono, the way the community interacts with Microsoft, the C# language itself and special features only available in 
Mono.<br><br>After this talk we went over to Janson for <a 
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrew_S._Tanenbaum">Andrew Tanenbaum</a>'s talk on <a 
href="http://www.minix3.org/">Minix</a>. We knew quite a bit of the talk already from Froscon two years ago, however 
Andrew is an awesome speaker, so it's always fun to catch up on the news on Minix.<br><br>The scalability talk started 
with an <a href="http://www.flickr.com/search/?w=all&q=fosdem+hadoop&m=text">introduction to Hadoop by myself and 
continued with a talk on the facebook infrastructure by David Recordon</a>. According to feedback I got after the talk, 
laughing with Thilo helped quite a bit to get myself calm. Before the talk I received one very good recommendation of 
one of the audio guys: Imagine you are giving the talk to one of your best friends - and forget about the microphone. 
Though I had way more slides than minutes to talk, we had enough time for the Q&A session after the talk.  I started 
the talk by learning more about the audience - however this time not by handing the microphone to those listening (room 
too large) - I just asked them "have you heard about Hadoop?" - half of the audience. Are you Hadoop users: one quarter 
maybe. How large are your clusters? - 10 to 100 nodes mostly. Have you heard of Zookeeper? - some, Hive - some more, 
Pig - a few, Lucene - a lot, Solr - a little less, Mahout - maybe 5, Mahout users: 1.<br><br>Turns out the Mahout user 
in the audience was Olivier: It's so nice to meet people you know are active on the mailing lists for real and have a 
chat with them. Hope to see you more often on the lists - and meet you face to face again.<br><br>I used the chance to 
announce the Berlin Buzzwords 2010, a two day event on search and scalability buzzwords like cloud computing, Hadoop, 
Lucene, NoSQL and more. It takes place on June 7th and 8th in the center of Berlin. Follow this blog for further 
information. Judging from the input I got after the announcement there is quite some need for such a conference in 
Europe.<br><br>The slides of my talk are soon to be <a 
href="http://www.isabel-drost.de/hadoop/slides/fosdem2010.pdf">available online</a>.<br><br>After my talk I could stay 
in <a href="http://www.flickr.com/search/?q=janson+fosdem">Janson</a>: A talk on the Facebook infrastructure (not only 
the Hadoop side of things) followed. After that I met Lars George at the NoSQL dev room - unfortunately I did not 
manage to actually talk to Steven Noels, who organised the room.<br><br>The afternoon was reserved for <a 
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greg_Kroah-Hartman">Greg Kroah-Hartman</a> on how to "Write and submit your first 
Linux Kernel Patch" - my personal conclusion: git is really awesome. I really, really need to find a few spare minutes 
to learn how to effectively use it.<br><br>In the evening we met with <a 
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pieter_Hintjens">Pieter Hintjens</a> for dinner - and to finalize an awesome weekend 
in Brussels and a great 10th anniversary FOSDEM. A huge Thank You to all volunteers and organisers of FOSDEM - you did 
a great job this year putting together an awesome schedule, you did a fantastic job making the now pretty huge event 
(with 306 talks and about 5000 hackers attending) run smoothly. Even the wireless was working from minute one. See you 
again at FOSDEM 2011.
