---
title: "FrOSCon - on teaching"
date: 2012-09-09T08:17:38+02:00
tags: education,FrOSCon,General,
---

# FrOSCon - on teaching


The last talk I went to during FrOSCon was Selena's keynote on "Mistakes were made". She started by explaining how she 
taught computer science (or even just computer-) concepts to teachers herself - emphasizing how exhausting teaching can 
be, how many even trivial concepts were unknown to her students. After that Selena briefly sketched how she herself 
came to IT - emphasizing how providing mostly the information she needed to accomplish the current task at hand and 
telling how to get more information helped her make her first steps a great deal.<br><br>The main point of her talk 
however was to highlight some of the underlying causes for the lack of talented cs students. Some background literature 
is online at <a href="http://piratepad.net/froscon-keynote-selena-reading-list">her piratepad on the 
subject</a>.<br><br>The discussion that followed the keynote (and included contributions from two very interested, 
refreshingly dedicated teachers) was quite lively: People generally agreed that computer science/ computing or even 
just logical and statistical thinking plays a sadly minor role in current education. Students are mainly forced to 
memorize large amounts of facts by heart but are not taught to question their environment, discover relations or rate 
sources of information. The obvious question that seemed to follows was that on what to remove from the curriculum when 
introducing computing as a subject. My personal take on that is that maybe there is no need for removing anything - 
instead changing the way concepts are taught might already go a long way: Put arts, maths, natural sciences and music 
into context, have kids evaluate statistics and rate them not only in maths but also in e.g. biology by letting them 
examine some common statistical fallacies in the subject area.<br><br>Another problem stated was the common lack of 
technical understanding, the common lack of time for preparation and the common lack of understanding for the concept 
of open source or creative commons content. Taken together this makes sharing teaching material and improving it 
together with others incredibly hard.<br><br>Selena's call to action was for geeks to get involved and educate the 
people near and dear to them instead of giving up. On thing to add to that: Most German universities have some sort of 
visitors' days to prospective students - some even have collaborations with schools to do projects together with 
younger ones - make sure to check out your own university - you might well find out that teaching is not only 
exhausting but also particularly rewarding especially when teaching students that really want to know and participate 
in your project just because they want to.<br><br>If you know any teachers who are open to the idea of having externals 
take over some their lessons or at least provide input get them connected with your peers that are interested in 
educating others. Also keep in mind that most open source projects, hacker spaces and related organisations in Germany 
are so-called "gemeinn√ºtziger e.V." - a status that in many cases was achieved by declaring the advancement of 
education as at least one of their goals.
