---
title: "Fun little new toy"
date: 2012-01-03T23:48:21+01:00
tags: hardware,Hacking,
---

# Fun little new toy


Yesterday Thilo invited me to attend an "Electronics 101" workshop including an introduction to soldering that was 
scheduled to start at 7p.m. this evening at the offices of <a href="http://www.in-berlin.de/news.html">IN-Berlin 
e.V.</a>. As part of my studies back in university I do have a little bit of background in Electronics, but never 
before had tried any serious soldering (apart from fixing one of our audio cables) so I thought, why not.<br><br><img 
src="http://isabel-drost.de/Bilder/wordpress/guckes_4_2012.JPG" width="100" style="float:right"/><br><br>The workshop 
turned out to be a lot of fun: The organisers <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mitch_Altman">Mitch Altman</a> and 
<a href="http://jimmieprodgers.com/">Jimmie Rodgers</a> had brought several <a 
href="http://www.makershed.com/product_p/mkad1.htm">pre-packaged kits</a> for people to work on. Quite a few of them 
based on Arduino so after putting them together you can actually continue having fun with writing little programs. 
After giving a brief but very well done, easy to understand introduction to digital electronics Mitch showed attendees 
how to use a soldering iron (make sure to check out his <a 
href="http://www.tvbgone.com/cfe_mfaire.php?PHPSESSID=17f9e92e25e4c6c5bb2d95c548a4db71">comic "soldering is easy"</a> 
if you want to know more) and got everyone started. Both Jimmie and Mitch did a great job answering any upcoming 
questions, fixing issues and generally helping out with any problems. Even those that never used a soldering iron 
before quickly got up to speed and in the end went home with that nice experience of having built something that you 
cannot only program but can touch and hold in your hands.<br><br>I got myself a <a 
href="http://www.makershed.com/LoL_shield_for_Arduino_p/mkjr3.htm">LoL shield</a> (still to be done), and a <a 
href="http://www.evilmadscientist.com/article.php/diavolino">Diavolino</a>. Still missing is the FTDI TTL-232R cable 
for getting the device hooked up to our laptops and be able to re-program it (though most likely that will be easier to 
find than a >1G Ohm resistor Thilo is looking for to be able to calibrate <a 
href="https://plus.google.com/102813492714620417611/posts/JtQ1jATsfAu">his Geiger counter</a>).<br><br>Results of my 
first session are below:<br><br><table><tr><td><img src="http://isabel-drost.de/Bilder/wordpress/guckes_3_2012.JPG" 
width="200"/></td><td><img src="http://isabel-drost.de/Bilder/wordpress/guckes_2_2012.JPG" width="200"/></td><td><img 
src="http://isabel-drost.de/Bilder/wordpress/guckes_1_2012.JPG" width="200"/></td></tr><br><tr><td>The 
board</td><td>First pins attached</td><td>Last pins attached</td></tr></table><br><br>Also thanks to <a 
href="http://www.guckes.net/">Sven Guckes</a> organising and <a 
href="http://www.guckes.net/2012-01-03.workshop/">announcing</a> this workshop on short notice. And thanks to Thilo for 
talking me into that.<br><br><b>Update:</b> <a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/maltman23">Images</a> of the event 
are available online.
