---
title: "How to get your submission accepted at Berlin Buzzwords"
date: 2013-05-07T11:21:48+02:00
tags: [review,talk selection,Berlin Buzzwords,Uncategorized,]
---

# How to get your submission accepted at Berlin Buzzwords


Disclaimer: Intentionally posting on my private blog - these are my own criteria, not general advice from the review 
committee.<br><br>Berlin Buzzwords is in it's fourth year. Probably the most tedious task of all is having to select 
talks to make it into the final schedule. With roughly 120 submissions and roughly 30 slots to fill the result is that 
three quarters of all submissions have to be rejected. Last year I shared some details on <a 
href="http://blog.isabel-drost.de/index.php/archives/376/berlin-buzzwords-scheduling-behind-the-scenes">how we do talk 
ranking</a> given reviewers have provided their input.<br><br>Now the mechanics of ranking are clear, people have asked 
me what goes into the reviews themselves. Here I can only speak for myself: After doing reviews ourselves during the 
first two years, Simon, Jan and myself decided to spread the work of reviewing submissions among a <a 
href="http://www.berlinbuzzwords.de/content/team">larger team</a> of people. As nearly all of them had attended Berlin 
Buzzwords in the past already (or had at least followed the conference remotely) we could assume they were roughly 
familiar with what kind of content would be a good fit. As a result review guidelines that we send out tend to be 
rather light:<br><br>Berlin Buzzwords is a conference from geeks for geeks: The goal is to get the people actively 
working in the field together to meet and exchange ideas. Content should have some technical depth - in particular pure 
marketing talks and obvious product placements without further technical value are not welcome. We usually invite both, 
interesting case studies as well as talks highlighting the technical details a project is built upon.<br><br><a 
href="http://berlinbuzzwords.de" target="_blank"><img 
src="http://berlinbuzzwords.de/sites/berlinbuzzwords.de/files/u561/BB13_160x270.png" style="float:right"></a><br><br>In 
the end judgement is up to the individual reviewer - so I can speak only for myself when listing what you should do to 
get your talk accepted.<br><br><ul><br><li>Be on topic. There's always a handful of submissions that look and sound 
like pure marketing, product placement or simply aren't related to software engineering at all. Those tend to be easy 
to spot and weed out.<br><li>Tell us what you are talking about. An abstract is there to provide some detail on your 
presentation - don't be just funny, promising overly generic content. In order to decide whether or not your talk is 
relevant please provide some details on which direction you'll be heading.<br><li>Don't be too detailed in the abstract 
neither - there's no need to list the content of every slide. Make sure the abstract correctly summarizes your talk, 
making it catchy and nice to read usually helps if the content is solid.<br><li>We try to find those speakers that have 
not only an interesting topic to talk about but are also a pleasure to listen to, who can successfully get their point 
across. We cannot know every potential speaker in person though. As a result it helps if you list which conferences 
you've spoken at in the past, any videos of previous talks is helpful as well. As a general piece of advice: Choosing 
Berlin Buzzwords as your first conference to speak at ever usually is a great way to disaster. Get some practice at 
local meetups like the <a href="http://www.xing.com/net/informationretrieval">Berlin Hadoop Get Together</a>, <a 
href="http://datascienceday.wordpress.com/">the data science day</a>, the <a href="http://www.jug-bb.de/">Java User 
Group Berlin Brandenburg</a>, the <a href="http://recommenders.de/">RecSys Stammtisch Berlin</a> or the <a 
href="http://www.meetup.com/MUGBerlin/">MongoDB User Group Berlin</a> to name just a few.<br><li>Make sure your talk is 
novel - submitting the same topic in 2012 and 2013 is a great way to ensure getting rejected. Also it is fine to submit 
a talk you have given at another conference earlier. However if everyone in the Buzzwords audience is very likely to 
have watched the exact same version of your presentation earlier already, we are less likely to accept your 
talk.<br><li>Finally: When drafting your bio make sure to include details that explain why you are the perfect expert 
to talk about the topic at hand. As much as I'd like to I don't know every project's committer by name. Provide some 
help by pointing out explicitly what your contributions have been or in what context you have used the technology you 
are presenting. Don't be shy to list that you are a co-founder of a successful project. Not only does this information 
help with selecting talks, it also provides some background for the audience to judge the claims you 
make.<br></ul><br><br>Two words on the role of free software at Buzzwords: There is no explicit requirement to only 
talk about software that is publicly available under a free software license however if some project or framework is 
presented it helps to be open source to raise the applicability for the audience. Most projects discussed at Berlin 
Buzzwords are developed openly. In order to get the maximum out of these projects it pays to know how they work 
internally, how to get active yourself, how to contribute. As a result discussions and talks on project governance are 
generally welcome.<br><br>A parting note: With way more than half of all submissions to reject making a final decision 
will always be hard. Being rejected doesn't necessarily mean that your proposal was bad. Following the above advise may 
raise chances of being accepted - however it is no guarantee. We could raise the number of accepted talks by extending 
the conference by another track or even another day - at the cost of raising the ticket price substantially. However we 
want not only "big corp representatives" but a diverse audience, attendees that get active themselves, that help shape 
the conference: <br><ul><br><li>Get active on stage at our Sunday evening <a 
href="http://www.berlinbuzzwords.de/wiki/barcamp">Buzzwords Barcamp</a><br><li>Provide introductory content to those 
entering the field at our weekend <a href="http://www.berlinbuzzwords.de/wiki/open-tech-school-trainings">Open Tech 
School trainings</a><br><li>Present your favorite topic on our <a 
href="http://www.berlinbuzzwords.de/wiki/openstage">Open Stage</a> during the main conference days.<br><li>Host 
workshops, hacking lessons or a bug squashing party at our <a 
href="http://www.berlinbuzzwords.de/wiki/interactive-program">interactive program</a> during the main conference 
days.<br><li>Organise or give a talk at one of our <a 
href="http://www.berlinbuzzwords.de/wiki/hackathons">After-conference hackathons, workshops, 
meetups</a><br></ul><br><br>There's plenty of space and time to get active in addition to the main conference program. 
Use the time and space to shape the conference.
