---
title: "Ken Schwaber in Berlin XBerg"
date: 2009-05-24T18:56:15+02:00
tags: software development,management,Scrum,General,
---

# Ken Schwaber in Berlin XBerg


Last week I attended a discussion meetup with Ken Schwaber in Berlin/ Kreuzberg. The event was scheduled pretty shortly 
- still quite a few developers and project managers from various companies in Berlin showed up.<br><br>Ken started with 
a brief summary of the history of Scrum: Before there was such a thing as an IT industry programming actually was a lot 
of fun. But somehow the creative job was turned into something people tend to suffer from pretty quickly as people 
tried to apply principles from manufacturing industries to software "production". Suddenly there was a distinction 
between testers, programmers, architects... People tried to plan ahead for months or even years noticing only very late 
in the process that the outcome was by no means what was needed when the product finally was ready.<br><br>In contrast 
to waterfall Scrum comes with very short feedback loops. It comes with developers working with very strong focus on one 
task at a time. Change is not hated but embraced and built into development.<br><br>Some features of Scrum that are 
often forgotten but never the less essential that were discussed that evening:<br><br><ul><br><li>Scrum is all about 
transparency - it's about telling your customers what is going on. It is about telling your customer honest 
estimations. It is about telling development to the best of your knowledge all that can makes up for a 
feature.<br><li>Scrum is neither easy nor a solution in itself. It is simply a way of uncovering problems very quickly 
that are easier to hide in waterfall processes. You have one person who is an isle of knowledge in your company? At 
every sprint planning  this problem will become obvious until you find a way to solve it.<br><li>Scrum is about giving 
developers a box of time that is not to be interrupted. Developing software asks for a lot of concentration. Getting 
interrupted and resuming work on the task again is so expensive that there is close to nothing this can be justified 
with.<br><li>A nice way of doing Scrum is to use Scrum for management and XP for development. Scrum does not provide 
any solutions on how to reach the goals set - it does not tell you exactly how to arrive at a stable release by the end 
of your sprint. It just sets the goal for you. On the other hand XP holds quite a few development best practices that 
can help achieve these goals.<br><li>It needs time to change how customers and developers are working: Yearlong 
experience has trained them to think in certain ways. So at the beginning Scrum is all about teaching and training 
people. It takes time to learn a new way of getting things done.<br></ul><br><br>There are ways to do fixed price 
contracts with Scrum. You just have a few more freedoms to offer to your customer:<br><br><ul><br><li>Tell your 
customer that your clients usually change their mind underway. Give them the freedom to change anything not yet 
implemented. An item can be exchanged with an item of equal cost for no increase in prize. An item can be exchanged 
with a cheaper item with a decrease of cost, it can be exchanged with a more expensive item for a rise in 
cost.<br><li>Tell your customer that you already have pre-priorized items. The client is free to re-prioritize items as 
he wishes - as long as the item was not implemented already.<br><li>Tell you customer that as you are implementing 
those items at first that have a high priority you may come to a point where those items not done are not important for 
release so he could eventually stop early and pay less.<br></ul><br><br>In summary the evening was very interesting and 
insightful for me. It helps to talk about Scrum implementation problems. To learn which problems others have and how 
they attack these problems.
