---
title: "March 2010 Apache Hadoop Get Together Berlin"
date: 2010-01-29T08:40:52+01:00
tags: Berlin,Solr,Hadoop,Get Together,Spatial,
---

# March 2010 Apache Hadoop Get Together Berlin


This is to announce the next Apache Hadoop Get Together that will take place in newthinking store in 
Berlin.<br><br><ul><br><li>When: March 10th, 4p.m.<br><li>Where: Newthinking store Berlin<br></ul><br><br>As always 
there will be slots of 20min each for talks on your Hadoop topic. After each talk there will be a lot time to discuss. 
You can order drinks directly at the bar in the newthinking store. If you like, you can order pizza. We will go to Cafe 
Aufsturz after the event for some beer and something to eat.<br><br><iframe width="425" height="350" frameborder="0" 
scrolling="no" marginheight="0" marginwidth="0" 
src="http://maps.google.com/maps?f=q&amp;source=s_q&amp;hl=en&amp;geocode=&amp;q=berlin+tucholskystr+48&amp;sll=52.52123
5,13.382254&amp;sspn=0.052434,0.110378&amp;ie=UTF8&amp;hq=&amp;hnear=Tucholskystra%C3%9Fe+48,+Mitte+10117+Berlin,+German
y&amp;z=16&amp;ll=52.527618,13.39285&amp;output=embed"></iframe><br /><small><a 
href="http://maps.google.com/maps?f=q&amp;source=embed&amp;hl=en&amp;geocode=&amp;q=berlin+tucholskystr+48&amp;sll=52.52
1235,13.382254&amp;sspn=0.052434,0.110378&amp;ie=UTF8&amp;hq=&amp;hnear=Tucholskystra%C3%9Fe+48,+Mitte+10117+Berlin,+Ger
many&amp;z=16&amp;ll=52.527618,13.39285" style="color:#0000FF;text-align:left">View Larger 
Map</a></small><br><br><br><br>Talks scheduled so far:<br><br>Chris Male (JTeam/ Amsterdam):  Spatial Search with Solr  
                  <br><br>Abstract: The rise in popularity of Google Maps and mobile devices with GPS have resulted in 
a trend in the search field. People are no longer content with finding results that match a text query, they also want 
to find results which are near a location. So called spatial search differs considerably from traditional free text 
search in that it cannot be achieved through common search techniques such as inverted indexes. Instead, new algorithms 
and data structures had to be developed that achieve efficient and accurate spatial search, that also allow spatial 
search to have a role in the determination of a result's relevance. This technology has primarily been found in 
proprietary closed source search applications, however in the last 12-18 months, considerable effort has been invested 
into bringing open source spatial search support to Apache Solr and Lucene. While much is still left to be done, this 
talk will introduce how spatial search is currently supported in Solr, what work is happening currently, and a roadmap 
for future developments.<br><br><br>Dragan Milosevic (zanox/ Berlin: Product Search and Reporting powered by 
Hadoop<br><br>Abstract:<br><br>To efficiently process and index 80 million products, as well as store and analyse 30 
million clicks and 500 million views daily, Zanox AG is using Hadoop HDFS and Map?Reduce technologies. This talk will 
present product-processing and reporting frameworks running on 17 node Hadoop cluster, being able to (1) robustly store 
products and tracking data in distributed manner, (2) rapidly consolidate, normalise and categorise products, (3) merge 
and aggregate tracking data and (4) efficiently builds indexes for supporting distributed search and reporting, running 
in several search clusters.<br><br>Bob Schulze (eCircle/ Munich): Database and Table Design Tips with 
HBase<br><br>Abstract: Recurring design patterns for the BigTable/HBase storage model.<br><br>A big Thanks goes to the 
newthinking store for providing a room in the center of Berlin for us. Another big thanks goes to <a 
href="http://maps.ovi.com">Nokia Gate 5</a> for sponsoring videos of the talks. Links to the videos will be posted 
here.<br><br>Please do indicate on the following <a 
href="http://upcoming.yahoo.com/event/5280014/BERLIN/Berlin/Apache-Hadoop-Get-Together-Berlin-March-2010/newthinking-sto
re/?ps=7">Upcoming</a> event if you are planning to attend to make planning (and booking tables at Aufsturz) easier. 
Registration through <a href="https://www.xing.com/events/apache-hadoop-march-2010-459305">Xing</a> is possible as 
well.<br><br>Looking forward to seeing you in Berlin,<br>Isabel
