---
title: "ApacheConNA: On delegation"
date: 2013-05-10T20:19:51+02:00
tags: [ApacheConNA,ApacheCon,Apache Con,community,]
---

# ApacheConNA: On delegation


<P><br>In her talk on delegation Deb Nicholson touched upon a really important topic in<br>OSS: Your project may live 
longer than you are willing to support it yourself.<br><br><P><br>The first important point about delegation is to 
delegate - and to not wait<br>until you have to do it. Soon you will realise that mentoring and delegation<br>actually 
is a way to multiply your resources.<br><br><P><br>In order to delegate people to delegate to are needed. To find those 
it can be<br>helpful to understand what motivates people to work in general as well as on<br>open source in particular: 
Sure, fixing a given problem and working on great<br>software projects may be part of it. As important though is 
recognition<br>individually and in groups of people.<br><br><P><br>Keeping that in mind, ``Thanking'' is actually a 
license to print free money in<br>the open source world. Do it in a verbose manner to be believable, do it in<br>public 
and in a way that makes your contributors feel a little bit of glory.<br><br><P><br>Another way to lead people in is to 
help out socially: Facilitate connections,<br>suggest connections, introduce people. Based on the diversity of the 
project<br>you are working on you may be in a way larger network and have access to much<br>more corporations and 
communities than any peer who is not active. Use that<br>potential.<br><br><P><br>Also when leading OSS projects keep 
in eye on people being rude: Your project<br>should be accessible to facilitate participation.<br><br><P><br>In case of 
questions treat them as a welcome opportunity to pull a new<br>community member in: Answer quickly, answer on your 
list, delegate to middle<br>seniors to pull them in. Have training missions for people who want to get<br>started and 
don't know your tooling yet. Have prepared documents to provide<br>links to in case questions occur.<br><br><P><br>In 
Apache we tend to argue people should not fall victim of volunteeritis.<br>Another way to put that is to make sure to 
avoid the licked cookie syndrom:<br>When people volunteer to do a task and never re-appear that task is 
tainted<br>until explicitly marked as ``not taken'' later on. One way to automate that is<br>to have a fixed deadline 
after which tasks are automatically marked as free to<br>take and tackle by anyone.<br><P><br>When it comes to the 
question of When to write documentation: There really is<br>no point in time that should stop you from contributing 
docs - all the way from<br>just above getting started level (writing the getting started docs for those<br>following 
you) up to the ``I'm an awesome super-hacker'' mode for those trying<br>to hack on similar 
areas.<br><br><P><br>Especially when delegating to newbies make sure to set the right expectations:<br>How long is it 
going to take to fix an issue, what is the task complexity, tell<br>them who is going to be involved, who is there to 
help out in case of road<br>blocks.<br><br><P><br>In general make sure to be a role model for the behaviour you want in 
your<br>project: Ask questions yourself, step back when your have taken on too much,<br>appreciate people stepping 
back.<br><br><P><br>Understand the motivation of your new comers - try to talk to them one on one<br>to understand 
their motivation and help to align work on the project with their<br>life goal. When starting to delegate, start with 
tasks that seem to small to<br>delegate at all to get new people familiar with the process - and to get<br>yourself 
familiar with the feeling of giving up control. Usually you will need<br>to pull tasks apart that before were done by 
one person. Don't look for a<br>person replacement - instead look for separate tasks and how people can best<br>perform 
these.<br><br><P><br>Make visible and clear what you need: Is it code or reviews? Documentation or<br>translations, UX 
helpers? Incentivise what you really need - have code sprints,<br>gamify the process of creating better docs, put the 
logo creation under a<br>challenge.<br><br><P><br>All of this is great if you have only people who all contribute in a 
very<br>positive way. What if there is someone who's contributions are actually<br>detrimental to the project? How to 
deal with bad people? They may not even do<br>so intentionally... One option is to find a task that better suits 
their<br>skills. Another might be to find another project for them that better fits<br>their way of communicating. Talk 
to the person in question, address head on<br>what is going on. Talking around or avoiding that conversation usually 
only<br>delays and enlarges your problem. One simple but effective strategy can be to<br>tell people what you would 
like them to do in order to help them find out that<br>this is not what they want to do - that they are not the right 
people for you<br>and should find a better place.<br><br><P><br>More on this can be found in material like ``How 
assholes are killing your<br>project'' as well as the ``Poisonous people talk'' and the book ``Producing<br>open source 
software''.<br><P><br>On the how of dealing with bad people make sure to criticise privately first,<br>chack in a 
backchannel of other committers for their opinion - otherwise you<br>might be lonely very quickly. Keep to criticising 
the bahaviour instead of the<br>person itself. Most people really do not want to be a jerk.<br>
