---
title: "Part 3: A polite way to say no - and why there are times when it does not work. "
date: 2010-09-07T23:05:13+02:00
tags: Hacking,saying no,energy management,Freetime,Time management,
---

# Part 3: A polite way to say no - and why there are times when it does not work. 


After having shared my thoughts on how to improve focus and how to track tasks eating up time this post will explain 
how to keep time invested at a more or less constant level. The goal of this exercise is to keep obligations at a 
reasonable level - be it at work or during ones spare time.<br><br>In recent time I have collected a small set of 
techniques to reduce what gets to my desk - I don't claim this list to be exhaustive. However some of it did help me 
organise conference and still have a life besides that. <br><br><h2>Sharing and delegating tasks</h2><br><br>Sharing 
and delegating are actually two different ways of integrating other people: Sharing for me means working together on a 
topic. That could be as easy as setting up a CMS or it could be more involved as in publishing articles on Lucene in 
some magazine. The advantage is that both of you can contribute to the task, possible even learn from each other: When 
I was doing the article series on Lucene together with Uwe it also was a great learning experience for me to have 
someone take the time to explain to me - well, not only to me - what flexible indexing, local search and numeric range 
queries are really all about, as in technically implemented. So it was not only an enormous time-saver for me, as the 
alternative would have been me reading through documentation, code and mailing lists to get up to date. But it also 
gave me the unique opportunity to learn from the very developers of these features about how they work and how they are 
meant to be used.<br><br>The disadvantage of sharing is that part of the work still remains on your desk. That's where 
delegation helps: Take the task, find someone who is capable and willing to solve it and give it to them. There are two 
problems here: First you have to trust people to actually work on the task. Second you probably cannot avoid checking 
back from time to time to see if there is progress, if there are any impediments etc. So it means less work than with 
sharing. But there is more risk in not getting your results and more work to be done for co-ordination. However it is a 
very powerful technique if applied correctly to scale what can be achieved: Telling people what you need help with and 
letting them take over some of that work does scale way better than micro-managing people or even trying to be part of 
every piece of a project. It means giving up some of your control, in return you can turn to other potentially more 
involved tasks. Note to self: Need to build up more trust in that area.<br><br>Both concepts however are not actually 
about saying no but about being able to say yes even if you already have just very few time 
left.<br><br><h2>Prioritisation</h2><br><br>Prioritising tasks can be done on a scale from zero to any arbitrarily 
large number. Obviously it helps with deciding whom to say no to: It's going to be those projects rated very low. That 
is those you could easily do without That's the simplest case as it is easiest to explain. The strategy I usually use 
is to be honest with people: If there are conflicting conferences, it's easy to reject invitations. If some publication 
does not pay for you, it's easiest to be open and honest with people and tell them. Usually they will 
understand.<br><br>A second reason for a rating of zero is that the task is one of those "Does not belong on my desk" 
tasks. My advice for those would be to get rid of them as quickly as possible: They draw away your energy without 
giving back any value. This issue plays nicely with the "patches welcome" theme from open source: People working on 
open source projects are most successful if they are driven by their own needs. So if you want something implemented, 
either implement and submit it yourself - or find someone you can pay to do so. People will not work for you. You can 
jump up and down, complain on the mailing lists - but if the feature you would like to see is something that no-one 
else in the existing community needs, it won't get done until someone needs it.<br><br><h2>Introduce 
barriers</h2><br><br>A nice way of rejecting favours that works at least sometimes is to raise the barrier. The example 
here would be getting an invitation to give an introductory talk for a closed audience. So what I tried was to raise 
the bar by asking for funding for travel and accommodation.<br><br>Keep in mind though that there is the risk that the 
one inviting you actually accepts your conditions - no matter how high you think you have set them. Especially the 
example given above has the problem of being too low a bar in most cases. So be prepared to have to keep your promise. 
As a result the conditions you set really should lead to the task turning into something that is fun to do. 
<br><br><h2>Cut off early</h2><br><br>Imaging you have committed to some task. Later on you realise you won't actually 
make it: You have no time, priorities have changed, the task is too involved or any other reason you could potentially 
imaging.<br><br>The important way to reduce the load on your desk is to communicate this issue as early as possible. 
It's clear that people will be more disappointed the later they learn that something they probably depend on won't 
arrive in time or will never happen: They'll never be extremely happy, however the sooner they learn the more time they 
have on their part to react. And actually, most people don't react that disappointed at all, simply because they may 
have counted some risk into the equation when giving you the task - which is not to say you should lower the 
reliability of your commitments, simply because no-one is expecting you to meet your goals anyway. However usually the 
amount of trouble expected is way higher than what actually happens. Second note to self: Don't forget about this 
option.<br><br><h2>Patches welcome</h2><br><br>At least in open source: If it's nothing that helps make your world 
better - there are other people out there to help out. Patches being welcome may seem obvious. However in some areas it 
really is not: If someone asks the project member to be present at some conference, he may himself not consider himself 
capable of representing the project or even just making an impact by talking to people about it. That is the point 
where to encourage people that any input is welcome - not only code, but also documentation, communication and 
marketing work.<br><br>Of course as with any Pattern there are boundaries when not to apply it or when applying it 
would mean too much effort or loss. If that is the case and you have committed and cannot step back, than you should 
think about what could be a great reward if you went through the tasks: What would it take to make you happily comply 
and still gain energy through what you are doing? Basically it isn't about doing what you like but about loving what 
you do (L. Tolstoi).<br><br>There is also valuable advice on <a 
href="http://www.apache.org/dev/committers.html#volunteer">managing ones energy</a> from the Apache Software Foundation 
that is specially targeted at new committers. If you have not done so yet take the time to read it.
