---
title: "Part 4: Constant evaluation and improvement: Finding sources for feedback."
date: 2010-10-24T08:13:08+02:00
tags: apprenticeship patterns,Hacking,Scrum,Freetime,Feedback,
---

# Part 4: Constant evaluation and improvement: Finding sources for feedback.


In recent years demand for shorter feedback cycles especially in software development has increased. Agile development, 
lean management and even Scrum are all for short feedback cycles: Coming from the dark ages when software projects 
would last for months or even years before any results could be delivered to customers we are transforming development 
into a process that integrates the customer in the design and evolution of his own product. Developers have learned 
that planning ahead for years does not work: It's not only customers changing their mind so fast, it's requirements 
changing quickly. The only achievement from months-long cycles is getting input on your work later, being able to hide 
deficiencies longer.<br><br>However not only for planning and management does it make sense to install fast feedback 
loops. A few days ago I finished reading the book <a href="http://oreilly.com/catalog/9780596518387">"Apprenticeship 
patterns"</a>. A book that gives an overview of various patterns that help improve software development 
skills.<br><br>One major theme was about getting fast feedback constantly. On the (agile) development side, automated 
tests (unit and integration)  and continuous integration systems are technical aids that can help. Pair programming and 
code review take the idea of fast feedback one step further by having humans give you feedback on what cannot possibly 
be evaluated automatically.<br><br>There is just one minor glitch: With really short feedback loops any mistake you 
make gets revealed instantly. This is not particularly special to agile development. Another area with these kinds of 
fast feedback loops are projects developing free software - see also the last paragraph in Bertrand's blog on <a 
href="http://grep.codeconsult.ch/2010/07/16/this-is-how-we-work-at-apache/">This is how we work at 
Apache</a>.<br><br>There are developers who have a hard time living with exposing their work to a wider audience 
quickly. However it has the huge benefit of revealing any errors as early as possible - ideally at a point in time 
where fixing them is still cheap. Examples for options spotting mistakes early in various environments are listed 
below:<br><br><ul><br><li>Open source development: Mistakes are revealed during code review of patches (or 
checkins).<br><li>Scrum: Speeding up error spotting can be implemented by closely integrating the product owner during 
each sprint. As soon as a feature is done - according to the developer team - it gets reviewed by the product owner 
this way reducing risk of features getting rejected during the sprint review.<br><li>In the team: Get each change set 
either mailed to all developers allowing for fast review of incoming code.<br></ul><br><br>These are all good ways for 
feedback, however what about non-coding areas? Are there ways to build fast feedback into tasks that do not involve 
coding? I'll pick just one example to highlight some ways that facilitate fast feedback in a non-coding 
environment.<br><br>From time to time even hard-core coders have to meet face-to-face to discuss new designs, learn 
more about customers' requirements. This may involve going to conferences, giving talks, organising internal workshops, 
public meetups or even conferences.<br><br>Usually people doing the organisation are too busy to "watch what happens": 
They already drown in tasks to do and have no time (and are in no good position) to objectively evaluate the 
conference's quality.<br><br>Still there are ways to build feedback loops even into this kind of setup. Most of them 
have to do with communication:<br><ul><br><li>Ask people to give you feedback in an official feedback form: Don't 
expect more than a fraction of the actual attendees to answer that form. Still it can be a source for honest feedback 
when done correctly. Include a few open questions, don't ask people to rate each and every task - they'll never find 
the time to do that anyway. Read the free-form comments - usually they provide way more insight than any rating 
question anyway.<br><li>Talk to people, ask for proposals on what you should do differently next time.<br><li>Watch 
what people are telling on the net - however keep in mind that those statements usually are a bit biased showing only 
the extreme ends of the spectrum.<br></ul><br><br>The same applies to people giving presentations: Talk to people from 
the audience after your presentation is over. If your talk was video-taped, you are in a really great situation, as now 
you can judge for yourself what should be improved and where there are glitches in your arguments.<br><br>According to 
my experience people very rarely give explicit feedback - except when being really disappointed or extremely positively 
surprised. However when asked for precise feedback on specific aspects people are usually more than willing to share 
their experience, tell you where to improve and what to change. Usually it turns out to be a good idea to actively seek 
out people for evaluation of your projects to get better at what you do, to encourage peers to tell you what you do 
wrong or even where you could get slightly better.<br><br>
