---
title: "Reasons for you to visit Berlin Buzzwords"
date: 2012-01-15T19:59:00+01:00
tags: [Relocating to Berlin,ostsee,ruegen,vacation,Berlin,paddeln,Berlin Buzzwords,Spreewald,]
---

# Reasons for you to visit Berlin Buzzwords


I've heard of several people who are not quite sure yet whether they should visit Berlin Buzzwords or not - in 
particular when having to travel far and cross 9 time zones to attend. My general recommendation is to plan to spend 
some more days in Europe. The conference is conveniently scheduled on Monday and Tuesday which gives you one weekend 
before to explore the city and the whole week afterwards to go and see more either in the city or around.<br><br>In 
case you are wondering whether the city is a worthy destination when travelling with children - below is a list of 
things to do and places to go I sent to someone recently. Hope it helps with your decision as well. In general the city 
is pretty green, there are several locations specially amenable to a visit with kids - so treat the list below as what 
it is: An incomplete listing of some of the most obvious locations that might be of interest collected by someone who 
knows a few parents and their children. Also in case you speak German make sure to check out one of the many <a 
href="http://www.amazon.de/Berlin-mit-Kind-TIP/dp/3832196552/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1326486808&sr=8-1">guide books for 
Berlin with children</a> available in local book stores - <a href="http://www.kulturkaufhaus.de/">Dussmann</a> and <a 
href="http://www.hugendubel.de/">Hugendubel</a> generally have the largest selection though <a 
href="http://www.chatwins.de/">Chatwins</a> is my preferred one for anything about travelling.<br><br><h2>In the 
city</h2><br><br>In case of good weather:<br><ul><br><li><a 
href="http://www.zoo-berlin.de/tierpark/visit-tickets/tips-for-your-visit/how-to-<br>reach-us.html?L=1">Tierpark 
Berlin</a> - make sure you visit Tierpark (not Zoo) - it's much larger and friendlier. See also <a 
href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/photomic/sets/72157607924734514/">images taken by Berlin Buzzwords fotographer 
Philipp</a>, <a href="http://www.flickr.com/search/?w=all&q=tierpark&m=text">general images</a>.<br><li>There is a huge 
park in walking distance of Brandenburger Tor: <a 
href="http://www.flickr.com/search/?w=all&q=tiergarten+berlin">Tiergarten</a> for recreation after sight 
seeing.<br><li>For swimming head over to either <a href="http://www.flickr.com/search/?w=all&q=wannsee">Wannsee</a> or 
<a href="http://www.flickr.com/search/?w=all&q=schlachtensee">Schlachtensee</a><br><li>For exploring a NSA listening 
station head west to <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teufelsberg">Teufels</a>-<a 
href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/photomic/sets/72157607924774440/">berg</a><br><li>On warm evenings plan for some 
time at <a href="http://tinyurl.com/bslwfvm">Maybachufer</a><br></ul><br><br>For bad weather:<br><ul><br><li>If your 
kids like tech go to <a href="http://www.sdtb.de/Home.623.0.html">Technik</a> <a 
href="http://www.flickr.com/search/?w=all&q=technikmuseum<br>">Museum</a> (it features one of the first computer (the 
one built by Zuse that is))<br><li>If you kids like nature go to <a 
href="http://www.naturkundemuseum-berlin.de/en/">Naturkunde</a> <a 
href="http://www.flickr.com/search/?w=all&q=naturkundemuseum">Museum</a><br><li>If you are interested in science - make 
sure to be here for the <a href="http://www.langenachtderwissenschaften.de/index.php">long night of science</a> (web 
page may need google translate unless you speak German.)<br><li>For a city tour check out the following <a 
href="http://g.co/maps/en28h">scribbles</a> - they also include some interesting parts of the bus line 100 and 
200<br></ul><br><br><h2>Close to the city:</h2><br><br>If you have some more time to spend make sure you also explore 
the closer surroundings:<br><br><ul><br><li>80km north: rent a canoo and explore <a 
href="http://www.flickr.com/search/?w=all&q=mecklenburg+canoe&m=text">Mecklenburg</a><br><li>200km north: visit <a 
href="http://www.flickr.com/search/?w=all&q=ruegen">RÃ¼gen</a>, spend some time swimming, some time to see the amazing 
chalk cliffs, some time to see the isle by bike<br><li>250km south: <a 
href="http://www.flickr.com/search/?w=all&q=elbsandsteingebirge">go hiking</a> or rafting in 
Elbsandsteingebirge<br><li>80km south: rent a canoo and explore the <a 
href="http://www.flickr.com/search/?w=all&q=spreewald+canoe&m=text">canals in 
Spreewald</a><br></ul><br><br><h2>Recommendations from friends</h2><br><br><ul><br><li>Dawid Weiss: Badeschiff - a 
pool-on-the-river thing. It's not something you get in any ordinary city :)<br><li>Steve Loughran: My son's favourite 
part of a trip to berlin (age 9) was actually the <a href="http://www.kolle37.de/">Bauspielplatz</a>: Smaller kids get 
a play area where they can use the sand + water to build streams, dam them and generally make a mess, while the 8+ get 
a playground where they actually help build it under adult supervision. They also run a good open air 
waffle/pancake/coffee shop. They're open in the afternoons.<br></ul> <br><br>Hope to see you in Berlin in June. If you 
need more information or recommendations don't hesitate to ask. <br> 
