---
title: "Scaling user groups"
date: 2010-05-26T19:32:39+02:00
tags: [Lucene,NOSQL,Hadoop,General,Mahout,Berlin Buzzwords,Meetups,Solr,Get Together,]
---

# Scaling user groups


A few hours ago, Jan Lehnardt posted a link on <a 
href="http://www.televisionsky.org/2010/05/how-to-put-on-a-nerd-conference/">How to organise a nerd conference</a> - 
joking that this is how we planned Berlin Buzzwords. Well, it is not exactly that easy - however the comic actually is 
not so far from the truth either:<br><br>About two years ago, after having started Apache Mahout together with Grant 
Ingersoll, Karl Wettin and others, several Apache Hadoop user groups, meetups and get togethers started to pop up all 
around the world. The one closest to me was the <a href="http://huguk.org">Hadoop user  group UK</a>. Back in 2008 I 
was pretty envious to all these user groups - being so distributed, there was no way I could ever attend all of them, 
though talks were certainly interesting. So the naive thought of a back then naive free software developer was: Let's 
have that in Berlin. To have initial talks I called Stefan Groschupf. His answer was very positive: Oh yeah, let's do 
this. I am in Germany for another two weeks, so it should be at about that timeframe. We agreed that if no-one showed 
up, we could still have some pizza together and share insights from our projects.<br><br>For the venue I knew from 
regular meetups of the Free Software Foundation Europe - read FSF*E* - that newthinking store was available for free 
for meetups for devs of free software. On I went, calling Martin from the store, booked the room. After that some mails 
went to the usual suspects, mailing lists and such. At the first meetup two years ago, more than 15 attendees - with 
two more people who had prepared slides. Pizzas obviously had to wait a little.<br><br>If you are wondering what that 
looked like back then - Thanks to Martin for taking the image back then and putting it online.<br><br><center><br><img 
src="http://www.spill-blog.de/files/images/hadoop_meetup.JPG"/> <br></center><br><br><br>We (as in all attendees) 
decided to repeat the exercise three months later*, talks for the next time were proposed during that first session. 
Noone objected to having it in Berlin again - everyone knew this was the only way to avoid having to do the 
organization next time.<br><br>The meetup grew steadily in size, talks started being proposed three to six months in 
advance. I ended up creating not only a <a href="">mailing list</a> for the meetup but also a <a 
href="http://blog.isabel-drost.de/index.php/archives/4/hadoop-get-together-berlin">blog</a> so I could publish news on 
Jan's CouchDB talk and Lars George's HBase talk back then. We got video sponsoring from <a 
href="http://www.cloudera.com/blog/2009/10/apache-hadoop-get-together-in-berlin-videos-online/">Cloudera</a> (Thanks 
Christophe), <a href="http://developer.studivz.net/2009/11/11/apache-hadoop-get-together-berlin/">StudiVZ</a> (Thanks 
Nils), and Nokia (Thanks Matt). Late last year I did the first European NoSQL meetup together with Jan Lehnardt - 80 
attendees, lots of potential for more, the newthinking store obviously a bit too small for that :)<br><br>If you are 
wondering what NoSQL and Hadoop meetups looked like last time:<br><center><br><table><tr><td><img 
src="http://farm3.static.flickr.com/2777/4037000912_87c7f46880.jpg" height="100"/></td><td><img 
src="/hadoop_march_2.JPG" height="100"/></td><td><img 
src="http://farm3.static.flickr.com/2726/4037000390_19de04533f.jpg" 
height="100"></td></tr></table><br></center><br>During that meetup the idea was born for a larger NoSQL conference in 
Berlin in 2010. First ideas were tossed around together with Jan and Simon Willnauer during Apache Con US in Oakland. 
The topic Hadoop got added there. In January 2010 finally Lucene was added to the mix. We contacted newthinking for 
support - got a very warm welcome.<br><br>Now - two years after the first Apache Hadoop Get Together Berlin we are 
proud to host Berlin Buzzwords - focussed on NoSQL, Apache Hadoop and search as in Apache Lucene.The conference is 
co-organised by newthinking communications, Simon Willnauer, Jan Lehnardt and myself. A big thanks to neofonie for 
supporting me by making it possible that I could do most of the organisation during my regular working 
hours.<br><br>The <a href="http://berlinbuzzwords.de/speakers">speaker lineup</a> looks fantastic. Registration is 
going very well - exceeding expectations (did I mention that <a 
href="http://berlinbuzzwords.de/content/tickets">registration is still open</a>, group and student tickets still 
available?). <br><br>I am really looking forward to an amazing conference on 7th and 8th of June. We will have a <a 
href="http://barcamp.org/BarCampBerlinBuzzwords">NoSQL barcamp</a> in newthinking store Sunday evening before the 
conference. Keynote speaker packages have been sent out and were well received. Hotel rooms for speakers are booked. We 
are about to pull together the last loose ends in the coming days. Happy to have so many guys (and a few girls) 
interested in scalability topics here in town at the beginning of June. Looking forward to seeing you in 
Berlin.<br><br><br><br><font size="-2">* The second meetup turned out to be the first and so far only one that took 
place w/o the organiser - I broke my leg on my way to newthinking by getting hit by a BMW X5... *sigh* Note for other 
meetup organizers: Always have a backup moderator - in may case that was my neofonie manager Holger DÃ¼wiger who 
happened to attend that meetup for the first time back then.</font>
