---
title: "Seminar on scaling learning at DIMA TU Berlin"
date: 2010-03-17T21:10:38+01:00
tags: Learning To Rank,dima,dups,NOSQL,Science,mapreduce,Mahout,topic tracking,topic detection,hbase,pnuts,TU Berlin,
---

# Seminar on scaling learning at DIMA TU Berlin


Last Thursday the seminar on scaling learning problems took place at DIMA at TU Berlin. We had five students give 
talks.<br><br>The talks started with an introduction to map reduce. Oleg Mayevskiy first explained the basic concept, 
than gave an overview of the parallelization architecture and finally showed how jobs can be formulated as map reduce 
jobs.<br><br>His <a href="http://isabel-drost.de/projects/tuberlin/imsem2010/mr_2010.pdf">paper</a> as well as his <a 
href="http://isabel-drost.de/projects/tuberlin/imsem2010/mr_paper_2010.pdf">slides</a> are available 
online.<br><br>Second was Daniel Georg - he was working on the rather broad topic of NoSQL databases. Being too fuzzy 
to be covered in one 20min talk, Daniel focussed on distributed solutions - namely Bigtable/HBase and Yahoo! 
PNUTS.<br><br>Daniel's <a href="http://isabel-drost.de/projects/tuberlin/imsem2010/nosql_2010.pdf">paper</a> as well as 
the <a href="http://isabel-drost.de/projects/tuberlin/imsem2010/nosql_paper_2010.pdf">slides</a> are available online 
as well.<br><br>Third was Dirk Dieter Flamming on duplicate detection. He concentrated on algorithms for near duplicate 
detection needed when building information retrieval systems that work with real world documents: The web is full of 
copies, mirrors, near duplicates and documents made of partial copies. The important task is to identify near 
duplicates to not only reduce the data store but to potentially be able to track original authorship over 
time.<br><br>Again, <a href="http://isabel-drost.de/projects/tuberlin/imsem2010/dups_2010.pdf">paper</a> and <a 
href="http://isabel-drost.de/projects/tuberlin/imsem2010/dups_paper_2010.pdf">slides</a> are available 
online.<br><br>After a short break, Qiuyan Xu presented ways to learn ranking functions from explicit as well as 
implicit user feedback. Any interaction with search engines provides valuable feedback about the quality of the current 
ranking function. Watching users - and learning from their clicks - can help to improve future ranking 
functions.<br><br>A very detailed<a 
href="http://isabel-drost.de/projects/tuberlin/imsem2010/learningtorank_2010.pdf">paper</a> as well as <a 
href="http://isabel-drost.de/projects/tuberlin/imsem2010/learningtorank_paper_2010.pdf">slides</a> are available for 
download.<br><br>Last talk was be Robert Kubiak on topic detection and tracking. The talk presented methods for 
identifying and tracking upcoming topics e.g. in news streams or blog postings. Given the amount of new information 
published digitally each day, these systems can help following interesting news topics or by sending notifications on 
new, upcoming topics.<br><br><a 
href="http://isabel-drost.de/projects/tuberlin/imsem2010/topic_paper_2010.pdf">Paper</a> and <a 
href="http://isabel-drost.de/projects/tuberlin/imsem2010/topic_2010.pdf">slides are available online</a>.<br><br>If you 
are a student in Berlin interested in scalable machine learning: The next course IMPRO2 has been setup. As last year 
the goal is to not only improve your skills in writing code but also to interact with the community and if appropriate 
to contribute back the work created during the course.<br><br>
