---
title: "Some thoughts on a conf taxonomy"
date: 2012-09-16T12:53:40+02:00
tags: conferences,General,
---

# Some thoughts on a conf taxonomy


One common way for open source developers to meet face-to-face is to attend conferences relevant to their subject of 
interest. A common way to have one near you if there ain't none yet is to go and organise one yourself. The most 
obvious stuff to resolve for that task:<br><br><ul><br><li>Most likely there will be some financial transactions 
involved - sponsors wanting to support you, attendees paying for their tickets, you paying for the venue and for 
food.<br><li>Someone will have to choose which speakers to invite.<br><li>How to scale if there are more speakers and 
attendees than you can reasonably welcome yourself.<br></ul><br><br>So far I've come across a multitude of ways to deal 
with these two issues alone. Some encountered at events with >200 attendees are listed below. Feel free to add your 
context.<br><br><table><br><tr><br><th>Name</th><br><th>Content selection</th><br><th>For 
profit</th><br><th>Tickets</th><br><th>Food</th><br><th>Scaling model</th><br></tr><br><tr><td>FOSDEM/ 
Brussels</td><td>open CfP, decision by organisers</td><td>Nope - it's hosted by a university, organised by a couple of 
students and an incredible multitude of volunteers.<td>Access is completely free though attendees are being asked to 
support the conference with a donation.</td><td>Food is on sale through the organisers</td><td>In addition to two main 
tracks there's a multitude of independently but affiliated and co-located so-called dev rooms that are completely 
community organised e.g. for Debian, Java, Embedded, KDE and others</td></tr><br><tr><td>Froscon</td><td>open CfP, 
decision by organisers</td><td>Nope - again hosted by a university, organised by a couple of students and 
volunteers</td><td>Tickets are cheap - in the 5 Euro range</td><td>Food is on-sale at the event.</td><td>There are 
workshops and related events that are community organised. Those are starting to get more visible in the main program 
as well.</td></tr><br><tr><tr><td>Linux Tage Chemnitz</td><td>open CfP, decision by organisers + 
committee.</td><td>Nope - hosted by TU Chemnitz with huge local support.</td><td>Cheap - in the 5 Euro 
range.</td><td>On sale at the event (soup and related stuff).</td><td>Stable number of attendees so 
far.</td></tr><br><tr><td>Chaos Communication Congress</td><td>open CfP, decision by organisers + 
committee</td><td>yes</td><td>for four days slightly less than 100,- Euro</td><td>on sale in the venue as well as 
around</td><td>move to different location</td></tr><br><tr><td>Chaos Camp</td><td>open CfP, decision by organisers + 
committee</td><td>yes</td><td>100 &lt; prize &lt; 500,- range for whole week including camping ground</td><td>on sale 
at the location</td><td>not needed so far</td></tr><br><tr><td>Berlin Buzzwords</td><td>open CfP, decision by 
volunteers</td><td>yes</td><td>more than 300,- Euros in early bird</td><td>included in the price</td><td>affiliated 
workshops</td></tr><br><tr><td>ApacheCon</td><td>open CfP, decision by volunteers</td><td>yes</td><td>in EU &gt;200,-, 
in US usually &gt;1k$</td><td>included in price</td><td>affiliated meetups</td></tr><br><tr><td>Lucene 
Revolution</td><td>open CfP, decision by organisers</td><td>more or less, mainly PR for 
organiser</td><td>&gt;500,-</td><td>included in price</td><td>not needed so far</td></tr><br><tr><td>GoTo 
Con</td><td>invitation only</td><td>yes</td><td>&gt;500,- range</td><td>included in price</td><td>turn the "one 
location" only conference into a series that moves across Europe with the help of some locals that are interested in 
having the event</td></tr><br><tr><td>Strata</td><td>open CfP, decision made by committee - final decision by 
organisers</td><td>yes</td><td>in the &gt;500 Euro range</td><td>included in price</td><td>split in different 
locations, organisers remain the same still</td></tr></table><br><br>From the above table to me it seems that most 
conferences differ in whether they are fully non profit solely for the sake of education. In contrast to that there are 
events that are for profit (as in support the organisers financially), or some kind of self-marketing where profit is 
indirect in terms of more contracts signed. They also differ in whether submissions are open or invited talks only. In 
addition there are those that have paid talks (usually clearly marked as such) or accept talks through the submission 
form only. In terms of cost one model is to go extremely low-cost with no money paid for venue or food vs. those that 
include catering in the ticket price.<br><br>Me personally I have a strong preference to events that feature an open 
CfP - mainly because talks tend to be more diverse and - given a strong program committee - also of decent quality as 
only the best make it through. In addition the events tend to be less formal when fully community organised - over time 
regulars among speakers, attendees and exhibition participants tend to know each other generating a rather friendly 
athmosphere.<br>
