---
title: "Trademarks and OSS - FOSDEM 02"
date: 2013-02-14T20:38:43+01:00
tags: oss,Fosdem,Event,trademarks,legal,
---

# Trademarks and OSS - FOSDEM 02


So the first talk I went to ended up being in the legal dev room on trademarks in open source projects. The speaker had 
a background mainly in US American trademark law and quite some background when it comes to open source 
licenses.<br><br>To start Pamela first showed a graphic detailing the various types of trademarks: In the pool of 
generic names there is a large group of trademarks that are in use but not registered. The amount of registered 
trademarks actually is rather small. The main goal of trademarks is to avoid confusing costumers. This is best seen 
when thinking about scammers trying to trick users into downloading users pre-build and packaged software from third 
party servers demanding a credit card number that is later charged based on a subscription service the user signed by 
clicking away the fine print on the download page. Canonical example seems to be e.g. the Firefox/Mozilla project that 
was effected by this kind of scam. But also other end-user software (think Libre/Open Office, Gimp) could well be 
targets. This kind of deceiving web pages usually can be taken down way faster with a cease and desist letter due to 
trademark infringement rather than due to the fraud they do.<br><br>So when selecting trademarks – what should a 
project look out for? One is the name should not be too generic as that would lead to a name that is not enforceable. 
It should not be too theme-y as the names that are themed usually are already taken. The time to research should be 
contrasted with the pain it will cost to rename the project in case of any difficulties.<br><br>There are few actual 
court decisions that relate to trademarks and OSS: In Germany it was decided that forking the ENIGMA project and 
putting it on set-op boxes but keeping the name was ok for as long as the core function would be kept and third party 
plugins would still work.<br><br>In the US there was a decision that keeping the name of re-furbished SparkPlugs is ok 
for as long as it is clearly marked what to expect when buying them (in this case re-furbished instead of newly 
made).<br><br>Another thing to keep in mind are trademarks are naked trademarks – those that were not enforced and have 
become too ubiquitous. In the US that would be the naked license trademarks, in Greece the recycling mark “Der Grüne 
Punkt” has become too ubiquitous to be treated as a trademark any more.<br><br>Trademark law already fails in 
multinational corporation setups with world wide subsidies. It gets even worse with world wide distributed open source 
projects. The question of who owns the mark, who is allowed to enforce it, who exercises control gets worse the more 
development is distributed. When new people take over trademarks there should be some clear paper transferral document 
to avoid confusion.<br><br>Trademarks only deal with avoiding usage confusion: Using the mark when talking about it is 
completely fine. Phrases like “I'm $mark compatible”, “I'm running on top of $mark” care completely ok. However make 
sure to use as little as possible – there is no right to also just use the logos, icons or design forms of the project 
you are talking about – unless you are talking about said logo of course.<br><br>So to conclude: respect referential 
use, you can't exercise full control but should avoid exercising too little control.<br><br>There is a missing 
consistent understanding of and behaviour towards trademarks in the open source community. Now is the time to shape the 
law according to what open source developers think they need.
