---
title: "Visiting Berlin Buzzwords - where to go for drinks and food"
date: 2012-03-07T19:39:50+01:00
tags: [Relocating to Berlin,Berlin,tourist,]
---

# Visiting Berlin Buzzwords - where to go for drinks and food


There are literally hundreds of bars and restaurants in easy walking distance to the conference venue. And if that is 
now enough for you, hop on U-Bahn and head east to either Kreuzberg or Friedrichshain to find more. For inspiration 
check out <a href="http://www.tip-berlin.de/essen-und-trinken">Tip Berlin</a> - they have a decent, reliable restaurant 
list.<br><br>For quick orientation: Berlin is no one city center but many districts that all have their own look and 
feel to them. Those most interesting for eating and drinking:<br><ul><br><li><a 
href="http://g.co/maps/g48fd">Schöneberg</a> is a bit more calm, well suited for eating out until late evening. The two 
areas that are most interesting are around Akazien-/Golzstr (head north from Hauptstraße up until Nollendorfplatz), 
Crellestraße, as well as the area around Bayrischer Platz.<br><li><a href="http://g.co/maps/5gy7d">Friedrichshain</a> 
is the area to go for drinks in the evening and to see the young, urban Berlin. Get lost in the famous "Simon-Dach" 
quarter ("Simon-Dach-Kiez" as we say in Berlin) with its cobble stone streets, wide sidewalks, bars, restaurants and 
cool little shops. If the weather is as nice as it has been on the weekend, it might be worth walking or cycling a 
little farther to Holzmarktstraße. Between the streets "An der Schillingbrücke" and "Michaeliskirchstr." (see 
http://bit.ly/cNqLZq) there are a few really nice outdoor beach bars right on the banks of the River Spree.<br><li><a 
href="http://g.co/maps/93ppq">Kreuzberg</a> comes in at least two flavours: For coffee and food head over to 
Bergmannstraße, for drinks at night go see Oranienstraße, for young and vibrant head over to Wrangelstrasse (do not 
miss <a href="http://www.qype.co.uk/place/9667-Heinz-Minki-Berlin">Heinz Minki</a>, <a 
href="http://www.freischwimmer-berlin.de/">Freischwimmer</a> and <a href="http://clubdervisionaere.com/">Club der 
Visionäre</a>), for a relaxed "down by the river" evening head over to Maybachufer (do not miss <a 
href="http://www.vanloon.de/">Van Loon</a>, also check out <a 
href="http://www.bethanien.de/kb/index/trans/en/page/news">Bethanien</a> close by).<br><li><a 
href="http://g.co/maps/ap3g5">Prenzlauer Berg</a> - young, family friendly, slowly being turned into a German <a 
href="http://www.morgenpost.de/berlin-aktuell/article1881593/In-Prenzlauer-Berg-schliesst-der-naechste-Club.html">Kleins
tadt</a> ;)<br><li><a href="http://g.co/maps/uka3f">Mitte</a> - a bit more fancy, gentrified, great if you love 
culture, museums, ballet, concerts. Remember to explore the city by boat. If you are hungry head over to Linienstrasse 
and explore the little streets around. There is tasty cheese fondue available at <a href="http://www.nola.de/">Nolas am 
Weinberg</a>. Go dance at <a href="http://www.ballhaus.de/">Clärchens Ballhaus</a>, get a coffee and code while 
drinking at web2.0 cafe <a href="http://www.sanktoberholz.de/">Sankt Oberholz</a>.<br></ul><br><br>Two special 
recommendations for breakfast:<br><br>On the weekend before the conference days are best started with a long and tasty 
brunch. My personal recommendation if you love tea is to head down to <a href="http://www.teeteathe.de/">TTT</a> - 
apart from serving best tea in town you can also get really tasty food there. And best of all, buy tea, tea cups and 
pots. I tend to take keynote speakers to that place - so far none has complained ;)<br><br>Another option is to start 
your day on top of <a href="http://www.bundestag.de/htdocs_e/visits/kupp.html">Bundestag</a> - enjoy the view of the 
city, take an audio, tour, eat breakfast in the Käfer Restaurant and maybe add a brief lecture on German legislation 
afterwards. Make sure to book about a month in advance!<br><br>For burgers there is no better place than <a 
href="http://www.qype.co.uk/place/14918-Burgermeister-Berlin">Burgermeister</a> in Kreuzberg. Best Falafel is on sale 
at <a 
href="http://maps.google.com/maps/place?um=1&ie=UTF-8&q=habibi+berlin&fb=1&hq=habibi&hnear=0x47a84e373f035901:0x42120465
b5e3b70,Berlin,+Germany&cid=6055860776730423299">Habibi</a>. Judging on where to get the best ice cream actually is a 
bit harder: <a href="http://www.qype.com/place/11893-Aldemir-Eis-Berlin">Aldemir</a> is the location in Kreuzberg, <a 
href="http://www.tip-berlin.de/kultur-und-freizeit-stadtleben-und-leute/weltberuhmt-schoneberg-chaos">Pinguin Club</a> 
is the location in Schöneberg (<a href="http://www.qype.co.uk/place/12326-Inka-Eis-Berlin">Inka Eis</a> beats that only 
if you are more for unusual types of ice cream), if you are in Mitte close to Brandenburger Tor consider visiting <a 
href="http://www.der-eisladen.de/">Der Eisladen</a> - lots of different types and really tasty.<br><br>When it comes to 
cocktails there are various locations - large and small that people tend to frequent. Some places to start and feel 
welcome: <a href="http://www.salut-berlin.de/">Salut</a>, <a href="http://www.greendoor.de/">Green Door</a> and <a 
href="http://www.staggerlee.de/">Stagger Lee</a>.
